<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h2>
			<p>Évariste
Gamelin was to enter on his duties on the
14th September, when
the reorganization of the Tribunal was complete, according to which it
was henceforth subdivided into four sections with fifteen jurors for
each. The prisons were full to overflowing; the Public Prosecutor was
working eighteen hours a day. Defeats in the field, revolts in the
provinces, conspiracies, plots, betrayals, the Convention had one
panacea for them all,—terror. The Gods were athirst.</p>
			<p>The first act of the new juror was to pay a visit of ceremony
to the
President Herman, who charmed him by the amiability of his conversation
and the courtesy of his bearing. A compatriot and friend of
Robespierre's, whose sentiments he shared, he showed every sign of a
feeling and virtuous temper. He was deeply attached to those humane
sentiments, too long foreign to the heart of our judges, that redound
to
the everlasting glory of a Dupaty and a Beccaria. He looked with
complacency on the greater mildness of modern manners as evidenced, in
judicial matters, by the abolition of torture and of ignominious or
cruel forms of punishment. He was rejoiced to see the death penalty,
once so recklessly inflicted and employed till quite lately for the
repression of the most trifling offences, applied less frequently and
reserved for heinous crimes. For his own part, he agreed with
Robespierre and would gladly have seen it abolished altogether, except
only in cases touching the public safety. At the same time, he would
have deemed it treason to the State not to adjudge the punishment of
death for crimes against the National Sovereignty.</p>
			<p>All his colleagues were of like mind; the old Monarchical idea
of
reasons of State still inspired the Revolutionary Tribunal. Eight
centuries of absolute power had moulded the magisterial conscience, and
it was by the principles of Divine Right that the Court even now tried
and sentenced the enemies of Liberty.</p>
			<p>The same day Évariste Gamelin sought an interview
with the Public
Prosecutor, the <i>citoyen</i> Fouquier, who received him
in the Cabinet
where he used to work with his clerk of the court. He was a sturdily
built man, with a rough voice, catlike eyes, bearing in his pock-marked
face and leaden complexion marks of the mischief wrought by a sedentary
and indoor life on a vigorous constitution adapted to the open air and
violent exercise. Towering piles of papers shut him in like the walls
of
a tomb, and it was plain to see he was in his element amid all these
dreadful documents that seemed like to bury him alive. His conversation
was that of a hard-working magistrate, a man devoted to his task and
whose mind never left the narrow groove of his official duties. His
fiery breath reeked of the brandy he took to keep up his strength; but
the liquor seemed never to fly to his brain, so clear-headed, albeit
entirely commonplace, was every word he uttered.</p>
			<p>He lived in a small suite of rooms in the Palais de Justice
with his
young wife, who had given him twin boys. His wife, an aunt Henriette
and
the maid-servant Pélagie made up the whole household. He was
good and
kind to these women. In a word, he was an excellent person in his
family
and professional relations, with a scarcity of ideas and a total lack
of
imagination.</p>
			<p>Gamelin could not help being struck unpleasantly by the close
resemblance in temper and ways of thought between the new magistrates
and their predecessors under the old régime. In fact, they
were of the
old régime; Herman had held the office of Advocate General
to the
Council of Artois; Fouquier was a former Procureur at the
Châtelet. They
had preserved their character, whereas Gamelin believed in a
Revolutionary palingenesis.</p>
			<p>Quitting the precincts of the court, he passed along the great
gallery
of the Palace and halted in front of the shops where articles of every
sort and kind were exposed for sale in the most attractive fashion.
Standing before the <i>citoyenne</i> Ténot's
stall, he turned over sundry
historical, political, and philosophical works:—"The Chains
of
Slavery," "An Essay on Despotism," "The Crimes of Queens." "Very good!"
he thought, "here is Republican stuff!" and he asked the woman if she
sold a great many of these books. She shook her head:</p>
			<p>"The only things that sell are songs and
romances,"—and pulling a
duodecimo volume out of a drawer:</p>
			<p>"Here," she told him, "here we have something good."</p>
			<p>Évariste read the title: "La Religieuse en
chemise," "The Nun in
dishabille!"</p>
			<p>Before the next shop he came upon Philippe Desmahis, who, with
a tender,
conquering-hero air, among the <i>citoyenne</i>
Saint-Jorre's perfumes and
powders and sachets, was assuring the fair tradeswoman of his undying
love, promising to paint her portrait and begging her to vouchsafe him
a
moment's talk that evening in the Tuileries gardens. There was no
resisting him; persuasion sat on his lips and beamed from his eye. The
<i>citoyenne</i> Saint-Jorre was listening without a word,
her eyes on the
ground, only too ready to believe him.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Wishing to familiarize himself with the awful duties imposed
on him, the
new juror resolved to mingle with the throng and look on at a case
before the Tribunal as a member of the general public. He climbed the
great stairs on which a vast crowd was seated as in an amphitheatre and
pushed his way into the ancient Hall of the Parlement of Paris.</p>
			<p>This was crammed to suffocation; some General or other was
taking his
trial. For in those days, as old Brotteaux put it, "the Convention,
copying the example of His Britannic Majesty's Government, made a point
of arraigning beaten Generals, in default of traitorous Generals, the
latter taking good care not to stand their trial. Not that a beaten
General," Brotteaux would add, "is necessarily criminal, for in the
nature of things there must be one in every battle. But there's nothing
like condemning a General to death for giving encouragement to others."</p>
			<p>Several had already appeared before the Tribunal; they were
all alike,
these empty-headed, opinionated soldiers with the brains of a sparrow
in
an ox's skull. This particular commander was pretty nearly as ignorant
of the sieges and battles of his own campaign as the magistrates who
were questioning him; both sides, prosecution and defence, were lost in
a fog of effectives, objectives, munitions and ammunitions, marches and
counter-marches. But the mass of citizens listening to these obscure
and
never-ending details could see behind the half-witted soldier the bare
and bleeding breast of the fatherland enduring a thousand deaths; and
by
look and voice urged the jurymen, sitting quietly on their bench, to
use
their verdict as a club to fell the foes of the Republic.</p>
			<p>Évariste was firmly convinced of one
thing,—what they had to strike at
in the pitiful creature was the two dread monsters that were battening
on the fatherland, revolt and defeat. What a to-do to discover if this
particular soldier was innocent or guilty! When La Vendée
was recovering
heart, when Toulon was surrendering to the enemy, when the army of the
Rhine was recoiling before the victors of Mayence, when the Army of the
North, cowering in Cæsar's Camp, might be taken at a blow by
the
Imperialists, the English, the Dutch, now masters of Valenciennes, the
one important thing was to teach the Generals of the Republic to
conquer
or to die. To see yonder feeble-witted muddle-pated veteran losing
himself under cross-examination among his maps as he had done before in
the plains of Northern France, Gamelin longed to yell "death! death!"
with the rest, and fled from the Hall of Audience to escape the
temptation.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At the meeting of the Section, the newly appointed juryman
received the
congratulations of the President Olivier, who made him swear on the old
high altar of the Barnabites, now altar of the fatherland, to stifle in
his heart, in the sacred name of humanity, every human weakness.</p>
			<p>Gamelin, with uplifted right hand, invoked as witness of his
oath the
august shade of Marat, martyr of Liberty, whose bust had lately been
set
up against a pillar of the erstwhile church, facing that of Le Peltier.</p>
			<p>There was some applause, interrupted by cries of protest. The
meeting
was a stormy one; at the entrance of the nave stood a group of members
of the Section, armed with pikes and shouting clamorously:</p>
			<p>"It is anti-republican," declared the President, "to carry
arms at a
meeting of free citizens,"—and he ordered the muskets and
pikes to be
deposited there and then in the erstwhile sacristy.</p>
			<p>A hunchback, with blazing eyes and lips drawn back so as to
show the
teeth, the <i>citoyen</i> Beauvisage, of the Committee of
Vigilance, mounted
to the pulpit, now become the speakers' tribune and surmounted by a red
cap of liberty.</p>
			<p>"The Generals are betraying us," he vociferated, "and
surrendering our
armies to the enemy. The Imperialists are pushing forward their cavalry
around Péronne and Saint-Quentin. Toulon has been given up
to the
English, who are landing fourteen thousand men there. The foes of the
Republic are busy with plots in the very bosom of the Convention. In
the
capital conspiracies without number are afoot to deliver <i>the
Austrian</i>.
At this very moment while I speak there runs a rumour that the Capet
brat has escaped from the Temple and is being borne in triumph to
Saint-Cloud by those who would fain re-erect the tyrant's throne in his
favour. The dearness of food, the depreciation of the <i>assignats</i>
are
the direct result of manœuvres carried out in our own homes, beneath
our very eyes, by the agents of the foreigners. In the name of public
safety I call upon the new juryman, our fellow-citizen, to show no pity
to conspirators and traitors."</p>
			<p>As he left the tribune, cries rose among the audience: "Down
with the
Revolutionary Tribunal! Down with the Moderates!"</p>
			<p>A stout, rosy-faced man, the <i>citoyen</i>
Dupont senior, a joiner living in
the Place de Thionville, mounted the Tribune, announcing that he wished
to ask a question of the new juror. Then he demanded of Gamelin what
attitude he meant to take up in the matter of the Brissotins and of the
widow Capet.</p>
			<p>Évariste was timid and unpractised in public
speaking. But indignation
gave him eloquence. He rose with a pale face and said in a voice of
suppressed emotion:</p>
			<p>"I am a magistrate. I am responsible to my conscience only.
Any promise
I might make you would be against my duty, which is to speak in the
Court and hold my peace elsewhere. I have ceased to know you. It is
mine
to give judgment; I know neither friends nor enemies."</p>
			<p>The meeting, made up like all meetings of divers elements and
subject to
sudden and incalculable moods, approved these sentiments. But the
<i>citoyen</i> Dupont returned to the charge; he could not
forgive Gamelin
for having secured a post he had coveted himself.</p>
			<p>"I understand," he said, "I even approve the juror's scruples.
They say
he is a patriot; it is for him to examine his conscience and see if it
permits him to sit on a tribunal intended to destroy the enemies of the
Republic and resolved to spare them. There are circumstances in which a
good citizen is bound to repudiate all complicity. Is it not averred
that more than one juror of this tribunal has let himself be corrupted
by the gold of the accused, and that the President Montané
falsified the
procedure to save the head of the woman Corday?"</p>
			<p>At the words the hall resounded with vehement applause. The
vaults were
still reverberating with the uproar when Fortuné Trubert
mounted the
tribune. He had grown thinner than ever in the last few months. His
face
was pale and the cheek-bones seemed ready to pierce the reddened skin;
his eyes had a glassy look under the inflamed lids.</p>
			<p>"<i>Citoyens</i>," he began, in a weak, breathless
voice that yet had a
strangely penetrating quality, "we cannot suspect the Revolutionary
Tribunal without at the same time suspecting the Convention and the
Committee of Public Safety from which it derives its powers. The
<i>citoyen</i> Beauvisage has alarmed us, showing us the
President Montané
tampering with the course of justice in favour of a culprit. Why did he
not add, to relieve our fears, that on the denunciation of the Public
Prosecutor, Montané has been dismissed his office and thrown
into
prison?... Is it impossible to watch over the public safety without
casting suspicion on all and sundry? Is there no talent, no virtue left
in the Convention? Robespierre, Couthon, Saint-Just, are not these
honest men? It is a notable thing that the most violent language is
held
by individuals who have never been known to fight for the Republic.
They
could speak no otherwise if they wish to render her hateful. <i>Citoyens</i>,
less talk, say I, and more work! It is with shot and shell and not with
shouting that France will be saved. One-half the cellars of the Section
have not been dug up. Not a few citizens still hold considerable
quantities of bronze. We would remind the rich that patriotic gifts are
for them the most potent guarantees. I recommend to your generosity the
wives and daughters of our soldiers who are covering themselves with
glory on the frontiers and on the Loire. One of these, the hussar
Pommier (Augustin), formerly a cellarman's lad in the Rue de
Jérusalem,
on the 10th of last month, before Condé, when watering the
troop horses,
was set upon by six Austrian cavalrymen; he killed two of them and
brought in the others prisoners. I ask the Section to declare that
Pommier (Augustin) has done his duty."</p>
			<p>This speech was applauded and the Sectionaries dispersed with
cries of
"Vive la République!"</p>
			<p>Left alone in the nave with Trubert, Gamelin pressed the
latter's hand.</p>
			<p>"Thank you. How are you?"</p>
			<p>"I? Oh! Very well, very well!" replied Trubert, coughing and
spitting
blood into his handkerchief. "The Republic has many enemies without and
within, and our own Section counts a not inconsiderable number of them.
It is not with loud talk but with iron and laws that empires are
founded
... good night, Gamelin; I have letters to write."</p>
			<p>And he disappeared, his handkerchief pressed to his lips, into
the
old-time sacristy.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The widow Gamelin, her cockade now and henceforth fastened
more
carefully in her hood, had from one day to the next assumed a fine,
consequential air, a Republican haughtiness and the dignified carriage
suitable to the mother of a juror of the State.</p>
			<p>The veneration for the law in which she had been brought up,
the
admiration with which the magistrate's gown and cassock had from a
child
inspired her, the holy terror she had always experienced at sight of
those to whom God had delegated on earth His divine right of life and
death, these feelings made her regard as an august and worshipful and
holy being the son whom till yesterday she had thought of as little
more
than a child. To her simple mind the conviction of the continuity of
justice through all the changes of the Revolution was as strong as was
that of the legislators of the Convention regarding the continuity of
the State under varying systems of government, and the Revolutionary
Tribunal appeared to her every whit as majestic as any of the
time-honoured jurisdictions she had been taught to revere.</p>
			<p>The <i>citoyen</i> Brotteaux showed the young
magistrate an interest mingled
with surprise and a reluctant deference. His views were the same as the
widow Gamelin's as to the continuity of justice under successive
governments; but, in flat contradiction to that good lady's attitude,
his scorn for the Revolutionary Tribunals was on a par with his
contempt
for the courts of the ancien régime. Not daring to express
his opinions
openly and unable to make up his mind to say nothing, he indulged in a
string of paradoxes which Gamelin understood just well enough to
suspect
the anti-patriotism that underlay them.</p>
			<p>"The august tribunal whereon you are soon to take your seat,"
he told
him on one occasion, "was instituted by the French Senate for the
security of the Republic; and it was for certain a magnanimous thought
on the part of our legislators to set up a court to try our enemies. I
appreciate its generosity, but I doubt its wisdom. It would have shown
greater astuteness, it seems to me, if they had struck down in the dark
the more irreconcilable of their adversaries and won over the rest by
gifts and promises. A tribunal strikes slowly and effects more harm
than
it inspires fear; its first duty is to make an example. The mischief
yours does is to unite together all whom it terrifies and make out of a
mass of contradictory interests and passions a great party capable of
common and effective action. You sow fear broadcast, and it is terror
more than courage that produces heroes; I pray, <i>citoyen</i>,
you may not
one day see prodigies of terror arrayed against you!"</p>
			<p>The engraver Desmahis, in love that week with a light o' love
of the
Palais-Égalité named Flora, a brown-locked
giantess, had nevertheless
found five minutes to congratulate his comrade and tell him that such
an
appointment was a great compliment to the fine arts.</p>
			<p>Élodie herself, though without knowing it she
detested everything
revolutionary and who dreaded official functions as the most dangerous
of rivals, the most likely to estrange her lover's affections, the
tender Élodie was impressed by the glamour attaching to a
magistrate
called upon to pronounce judgment in matters of life and death. Besides
which, Évariste's promotion as a juryman was followed by
other fortunate
results that filled her loving heart with satisfaction; the <i>citoyen</i>
Jean Blaise made a point of calling at the studio in the Place de
Thionville and embraced the young juror affectionately in a burst of
manly sympathy.</p>
			<p>Like all the anti-revolutionaries, he had a great respect for
the
authorities established by the Republic, and ever since he had been
denounced for fraud in connection with his supplies for the army, the
Revolutionary Tribunal had inspired him with a wholesome dread. He felt
himself to be a person too much in the public eye and mixed up in too
many transactions to enjoy perfect security; so the <i>citoyen</i>
Gamelin
struck him as a friend worth cultivating. When all was said, one was a
good citizen and on the side of justice.</p>
			<p>He gave the painter magistrate his hand, declaring himself his
true
friend and a true patriot, a well-wisher of the arts and of liberty.
Gamelin forgot his injuries and pressed the hand so generously offered.</p>
			<p>"<i>Citoyen</i> Évariste Gamelin," said
Jean Blaise, "I appeal to you as a
friend and as a man of talent. I am going to take you to-morrow for two
days' jaunt in the country; you can do some drawing and we can enjoy a
talk."</p>
			<p>Several times every year the print-dealer was in the habit of
making a
two or three days' expedition of this sort in the company of artists
who
made drawings, according to his suggestions, of landscapes and ruins.
He
was quick to see what would please the public and these little journeys
always resulted in some picturesque bits which were then finished at
home and cleverly engraved; prints in red or colours were struck off
from these, and brought in a good profit to the <i>citoyen</i>
Blaise. From
the same sketches he had over-doors and panels executed, which sold as
well or better than the decorative works of Hubert Robert.</p>
			<p>On this occasion he had invited the <i>citoyen</i>
Gamelin to accompany him
to sketch buildings after nature, so much had the juror's office
increased the painter's importance in his eyes. Two other artists were
of the party, the engraver Desmahis, who drew well, and an almost
unknown man, Philippe Dubois, an excellent designer in the style of
Robert. According to custom, the <i>citoyenne</i>
Élodie with her friend the
<i>citoyenne</i> Hasard accompanied the artists. Jean
Blaise, an adept at
combining pleasure with profit, had also extended an invitation to the
<i>citoyenne</i> Thévenin, an actress at the
Vaudeville, who was reputed to
be on the best of terms with him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
