<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>On Saturday at seven in the morning the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise, in a black cocked-hat, scarlet waistcoat, doe-skin breeches, and boots with yellow tops, rapped with the handle of his riding-whip at the studio door. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Gamelin was in the room in polite conversation with the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Brotteaux, while Évariste stood before a bit of looking-glass knotting his high white cravat.</p>
			<p>“A pleasant journey, Monsieur Blaise!” the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> greeted him. “But, as you are going to paint landscapes, why don’t you take Monsieur Brotteaux, who is a painter?”</p>
			<p>“Well, well,” said Jean Blaise, “will you come with us, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Brotteaux?”</p>
			<p>On being assured he would not be intruding, Brotteaux, a man of a sociable temper and fond of all amusements, accepted the invitation.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Élodie had climbed the four storeys to embrace the widow Gamelin, whom she called her good mother. She was in white from head to foot, and smelt of lavender.</p>
			<p>An old two-horsed travelling <i xml:lang="fr">berline</i> stood waiting in the Place, with the hood down. Rose Thévenin occupied the back seat with Julienne Hasard. Élodie made the actress sit on the right, took the left-hand place herself and put the slim Julienne between the two of them. Brotteaux settled himself, back to the horses, facing the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Thévenin; Philippe Dubois, opposite the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Hasard; Évariste opposite Élodie. As for Philippe Desmahis, he planted his athletic figure on the box, on the coachman’s left, and proceeded to amaze that worthy with a traveller’s tale about a country in America where the trees bore chitterlings and saveloys by way of fruit.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise, who was a capital rider, took the road on horseback, going on in front to escape the dust from the <i xml:lang="fr">berline</i>.</p>
			<p>As the wheels rattled merrily over the suburban roads the travellers began to forget their cares, and at sight of the green fields and trees and sky, their minds turned to gay and pleasant thoughts. Élodie dreamed she was surely born to rear poultry with Évariste, a country justice, to help her, in some village on a river bank beside a wood. The roadside elms whirled by as they sped along. Outside the villages the peasants’ mastiffs dashed out to intercept the carriage and barked at the horses, while a fat spaniel, lying in the roadway, struggled reluctantly to its feet; the fowls scattered and fled; the geese in a close-packed band waddled slowly out of the way. The children, with their fresh morning faces, watched the company go by. It was a hot day and a cloudless sky. The parched earth was thirsting for rain. They alighted just outside Villejuif. On their way through the little town, Desmahis went into a fruiterer’s to buy cherries for the overheated <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes</span>. The shop-keeper was a pretty woman, and Desmahis showed no signs of reappearing. Philippe Dubois shouted to him, using the nickname his friends constantly gave him:</p>
			<p>“Ho there! Barbaroux! … Barbaroux!”</p>
			<p>At this hated name the passers-by pricked up their ears and faces appeared at every window. Then, when they saw a young and handsome man emerge from the shop, his jacket thrown open, his neckerchief flying loose over a muscular chest, and carrying over his shoulder a basket of cherries and his coat at the end of a stick, taking him for the proscribed girondist, a posse of sansculottes laid violent hands on him. Regardless of his indignant protests, they would have haled him to the town-hall, had not old Brotteaux, Gamelin, and the three young women borne testimony that the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> was named Philippe Desmahis, a copper-plate engraver and a good Jacobin. Even then the suspect had to show his <i xml:lang="fr">carte de civisme</i>, which he had in his pocket by great good luck, for he was very heedless in such matters. At this price he escaped from the hands of these patriotic villagers without worse loss than one of his lace ruffles, which had been torn off; but this was a trifle after all. He even received the apologies of the National Guards who had hustled him the most savagely and who now spoke of carrying him in triumph to the Hôtel de Ville.</p>
			<p>A free man again and with the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes</span> Élodie, Rose, and Julienne crowding round him, Desmahis looked at Philippe Dubois⁠—he did not like the man and suspected him of having played him a practical joke⁠—with a wry smile, and towering above him by a whole head:</p>
			<p>“Dubois,” he told him, “if you call me Barbaroux again, I shall call you Brissot; he is a little fat man with a silly face, greasy hair, an oily skin and damp hands. They’ll be perfectly sure you are the infamous Brissot, the people’s enemy; and the good Republicans, filled with horror and loathing at sight of you, will hang you from the nearest lamp-post. You hear me?”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise, who had been watering his horse, announced that he had arranged the affair, though it was quite plain to everybody that it had been arranged without him.</p>
			<p>The company got in again, and as they drove on, Desmahis informed the coachman that in this same plain of Longjumeau several inhabitants of the Moon had once come down, in shape and colour much like frogs, only very much bigger. Philippe Dubois and Gamelin talked about their art. Dubois, a pupil of Regnault, had been to Rome, where he had seen Raphael’s tapestries, which he set above all the masterpieces of the world. He admired Correggio’s colouring, Annibale Caracci’s invention, Domenichino’s drawing, but thought nothing comparable in point of style with the pictures of Pompeio Battoni. He had been in touch at Rome with Monsieur Ménageot and Madame Lebrun, who had both pronounced against the Revolution; so the less said of them the better. But he spoke highly of Angelica Kauffmann, who had a pure taste and a fine knowledge of the Antique.</p>
			<p>Gamelin deplored that the apogee of French painting, belated as it was, for it only dated from Lesueur, Claude and Poussin and corresponded with the decadence of the Italian and Flemish schools, had been succeeded by so rapid and profound a decline. This he attributed to the degraded state of manners and to the Academy, which was the expression of that state. But the Academy had been happily abolished, and under the influence of new canons, David and his school were creating an art worthy of a free people. Among the young painters, Gamelin, without a trace of envy, gave the first place to Hennequin and Topino-Lebrun. Philippe Dubois preferred his own master Regnault to David, and founded his hopes for the future of painting on that rising artist Gérard.</p>
			<p>Meantime Élodie complimented the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Thévenin on her red velvet toque and white gown. The actress repaid the compliment by congratulating her two companions on their toilets and advising them how to do better still; the thing, she said, was to be more sparing in ornaments and trimmings.</p>
			<p>“A woman can never be dressed too simply,” was her dictum. “We see this on the stage, where the costume should allow every pose to be appreciated. That is its true beauty and it needs no other.”</p>
			<p>“You are right, my dear,” replied Élodie. “Only there is nothing more expensive in dress than simplicity. It is not always out of bad taste we add frills and furbelows; sometimes it is to save our pockets.”</p>
			<p>They discussed eagerly the autumn fashions⁠—frocks entirely plain and short-waisted.</p>
			<p>“So many women disfigure themselves through following the fashion!” declared Rose Thévenin. “In dressing every woman should study her own figure.”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing beautiful save draperies that follow the lines of the figure and fall in folds,” put in Gamelin. “Everything that is cut out and sewn is hideous.”</p>
			<p>These sentiments, more appropriate in a treatise of Winckelmann’s than in the mouth of a man talking to Parisiennes, met with the scorn they deserved, being entirely disregarded.</p>
			<p>“For the winter,” observed Élodie, “they are making quilted gowns in Lapland style of taffeta and muslin, and coats <i xml:lang="fr">à la Zulime</i>, round-waisted and opening over a stomacher <i xml:lang="fr">à la Turque</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Nasty cheap things,” declared the actress, “you can buy them ready made. Now I have a little seamstress who works like an angel and is not dear; I’ll send her to see you, my dear.”</p>
			<p>So they prattled on trippingly, eagerly discussing and appraising different fine fabrics⁠—striped taffeta, self-coloured china silk, muslin, gauze, nankeen.</p>
			<p>And old Brotteaux, as he listened to them, thought with a pensive pleasure of these veils that hide women’s charms and change incessantly⁠—how they last for a few years to be renewed eternally like the flowers of the field. And his eyes, as they wandered from the three pretty women to the cornflowers and the poppies in the wheat, were wet with smiling tears.</p>
			<p>They reached Orangis about nine o’clock and stopped before the inn, the Auberge de la Cloche, where the Poitrines, husband and wife, offered accommodation for man and beast. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise, who had repaired any disorder in his dress, helped the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes</span> to alight. After ordering dinner for midday, they all set off, preceded by their paintboxes, drawing-boards, easels, and parasols, which were carried by a village lad, for the meadows near the confluence of the Orge and the Yvette, a charming bit of country giving a view over the verdant plain of Longjumeau and bounded by the Seine and the woods of Sainte-Geneviève.</p>
			<p>Jean Blaise, the leader of the troop of artists, was bandying funny stories with the ci-devant financier, tales that brought in without rhyme or reason Verboquet the Open-handed, Catherine Cuissot the pedlar, the demoiselles Chaudron, the fortune-teller Galichet, as well as characters of a later time like Cadet-Rousselle and Madame Angot.</p>
			<p>Évariste, inspired with a sudden love of nature, as he saw a troop of harvesters binding their sheaves, felt the tears rise to his eyes, while visions of concord and affection filled his heart. For his part, Desmahis was blowing the light down of the seeding dandelions into the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes’</span> hair. All three loved posies, as town-bred girls always do, and were busy in the meadows plucking the mullein, whose blossoms grow in spikes close round the stem, the campanula, with its little blue-bells hanging in rows one above another, the slender twigs of the scented vervain, wallwort, mint, dyer’s weed, milfoil⁠—all the wild flowers of late summer. Jean-Jacques had made botany the fashion among townswomen, so all three knew the name and symbolism of every flower. As the delicate petals, drooping for want of moisture, wilted in her hands and fell in a shower about her feet, the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Élodie sighed:</p>
			<p>“They are dying already, the poor flowers!”</p>
			<p>All set to work and strove to express nature as they saw her; but each saw her through the eyes of a master. In a short time Philippe Dubois had knocked off in the style of Hubert Robert a deserted farm, a clump of storm-riven trees, a dried-up torrent. Évariste Gamelin found a landscape by Poussin ready made on the banks of the Yvette. Philippe Desmahis was at work before a pigeon-cote in the picaresque manner of Callot and Duplessis. Old Brotteaux who piqued himself on imitating the Flemings, was drawing a cow with infinite care. Élodie was sketching a peasant’s hut, while her friend Julienne, who was a colourman’s daughter, set her palette. A swarm of children pressed about her, watching her paint, whom she would scold out of her light at intervals, calling them pestering gnats and giving them lollipops. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Thévenin, picking out the pretty ones, would wash their faces, kiss them and put flowers in their hair. She fondled them with a gentle air of melancholy, because she had missed the joy of motherhood⁠—as well as to heighten her fascinations by a show of tender sentiment and to practise herself in the art of pose and grouping.</p>
			<p>She was the only member of the party neither drawing nor painting. She devoted her attention to learning a part and still more to charming her companions, flitting from one to another, book in hand, a bright, entrancing creature.</p>
			<p>“No complexion, no figure, no voice, no nothing,” declared the women⁠—and she filled the earth with movement, colour and harmony. Faded, pretty, tired, indefatigable, she was the joy of the expedition. A woman of ever-varying moods, but always gay, sensitive, quick-tempered and yet easy-going and accommodating, a sharp tongue with the most polished utterance, vain, modest, true, false, delightful; if Rose Thévenin enjoyed no triumphant success, if she was not worshipped as a goddess, it was because the times were out of joint and Paris had no more incense, no more altars for the Graces. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Blaise herself, who made a face when she spoke of her and used to call her “my step-mother,” could not see her and not be subjugated by such an array of charms.</p>
			<p>They were rehearsing <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Les Visitandines</i> at the Théâtre Feydeau, and Rose was full of self-congratulation at having a part full of “naturalness.” It was this quality she strove after, this she sought and this she found.</p>
			<p>“Then we shall not see ‘Paméla’?” asked Desmahis.</p>
			<p>The Théâtre de la Nation was closed and the actors packed off to the Madelonnettes and to Pélagie.</p>
			<p>“Do you call that liberty?” cried Rose Thévenin, raising her beautiful eyes to heaven in indignant protest.</p>
			<p>“The players of the Théâtre de la Nation are aristocrats, and the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> François’ piece tends to make men regret the privileges of the noblesse.”</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen,” said Rose Thévenin, “have you patience to listen only to those who flatter you?”</p>
			<p>As midday approached everybody began to feel pangs of hunger and the little band marched back to the inn.</p>
			<p>Évariste walked beside Élodie, smilingly recalling memories of their first meetings:</p>
			<p>“Two young birds had fallen out of their nests on the roof on to the sill of your window. You brought the little creatures up by hand; one of them lived and in due time flew away. The other died in the nest of cotton-wool you had made him. ‘It was the one I loved best,’ I remember you said. That day, Élodie, you were wearing a red bow in your hair.”</p>
			<p>Philippe Dubois and Brotteaux, a little behind the rest, were talking of Rome, where they had both been, the latter in ’72, the other towards the last days of the Academy. Brotteaux indeed had never forgotten the Princess Mondragone, to whom he would most certainly have poured out his plaints but for the Count Altieri, who always followed her like her shadow. Nor did Philippe Dubois fail to mention that he had been invited to dine with Cardinal de Bernis and that he was the most obliging host in the world.</p>
			<p>“I knew him,” said Brotteaux, “and I may add without boasting that I was for some while one of his most intimate friends; he had a taste for low society. He was an amiable man, and for all his affectation of telling fairy tales, there was more sound philosophy in his little finger than in the heads of all you Jacobins, who are for making us virtuous and God-fearing by Act of Parliament. Upon my word I prefer our simple-minded theophagists who know not what they say nor yet what they do, to these mad law-menders, who make it their business to guillotine us in order to render us wise and virtuous and adorers of the Supreme Being who has created them in His likeness. In former days I used to have Mass said in the Chapel at Les Ilettes by a poor devil of a Curé who used to say in his cups: ‘Don’t let’s speak ill of sinners; we live by ’em, we priests, unworthy as we are!’ You must agree, sir, this prayer-monger held sound maxims of government. We should adopt his principles, and govern men as being what they are and not what we should like them to be.”</p>
			<p>Rose Thévenin had meantime drawn closer to the old man. She knew he had lived on a grand scale, and the thought of this gilded the ci-devant financier’s present poverty, which she deemed less humiliating as being due to general causes, the result of the public bankruptcy. She saw in him, with curiosity not unmixed with respect, the survival of one of those open-handed millionaires of whom her elder comrades of the stage spoke with sighs of unfeigned regret. Besides, the old fellow in his plum-coloured coat, so threadbare and so well brushed, pleased her by his agreeable address.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur Brotteaux,” she said to him, “we know how once upon a time, in a noble park, on moonlight nights, you would slip into the shade of myrtle groves with actresses and dancing-girls to the far-off shrilling of flutes and fiddles. … Alas! they were more lovely, were they not, your goddesses of the Opera and the Comédie-Française, than we of to-day, we poor little National actresses?”</p>
			<p>“Never think it, Mademoiselle,” returned Brotteaux, “but believe me, if one like you had been known in those days, she would have moved alone, as sovereign queen without a rival (little as she would have desired such solitude), in the park you are obliging enough to form so flattering a picture of. …”</p>
			<p>It was quite a rustic inn, this Hôtel de la Cloche. A branch of holly hung over the great waggon doors that opened on a courtyard where fowls were always pecking about in the damp soil. On the far side of this stood the house itself, consisting of a ground floor and one storey above, crowned by a high-pitched tiled roof and with walls almost hidden under old climbing rose-trees covered with blossom. To the right, trimmed fruit-trees showed their tops above the low garden wall. To the left was the stable, with an outside manger and a barn supported by wooden pillars. A ladder leaned against the wall. Here again, under a shed crowded with agricultural implements and stumps of trees, a white cock was keeping an eye on his hens from the top of a broken-down cabriolet. The courtyard was enclosed on this side by cow-sheds, in front of which rose in mountainous grandeur a dunghill which at this moment a girl as broad as she was long, with straw-coloured hair, was turning over with a pitchfork. The liquid manure filled her sabots and bathed her bare feet, and you could see the heels rise out of her shoes every now and then as yellow as saffron. Her petticoats were kilted and revealed the filth on her enormous calves and thick ankles. While Philippe Desmahis was staring at her, surprised and tickled by the whimsicalities of nature in framing this odd example of breadth without length, the landlord shouted:</p>
			<p>“Ho, there! Tronche, my girl! go fetch some water!”</p>
			<p>She turned her head, showing a scarlet face and a vast mouth in which one huge front tooth was missing. It had needed nothing less than a bull’s horn to effect a breach in that powerful jaw. She stood there grinning, pitchfork on shoulder. Her sleeves were rolled up and her arms, as thick as another woman’s thighs, gleamed in the sun.</p>
			<p>The table was laid in the farm kitchen, where a brace of fowls was roasting⁠—they were almost done to a turn⁠—under the hood of the open fireplace, above which hung two or three old fowling-pieces by way of ornament. The bare whitewashed room, twenty feet long, was lighted only through the panes of greenish glass let into the door and by a single window, framed in roses, near which the grandmother sat turning her spinning-wheel. She wore a coif and a lace frilling in the fashion of the Regency. Her gnarled, earth-stained fingers held the distaff. Flies clustered about her lids without her trying to drive them away. As a child in her mother’s arms, she had seen Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> go by in his coach.</p>
			<p>Sixty years ago she had made the journey to Paris. In a weak sing-song voice she told the tale to the three young women, standing in front of her, how she had seen the Hôtel de Ville, the Tuileries and the Samaritaine, and how, when she was crossing the Pont-Royal, a barge loaded with apples for the Marché du Mail had broken up, the apples had floated down the current and the river was all red with the rosy-cheeked fruit.</p>
			<p>She had been told of the changes that had occurred of late in the kingdom, and in particular of the coil there was betwixt the curés who had taken the oath and the nonjuring curés. She knew likewise there had been wars and famines and portents in the sky. She did not believe the King was dead. They had contrived his escape, she <em>would</em> have it, by a subterranean passage, and had handed over to the headsman in his stead a man of the common people.</p>
			<p>At the old woman’s feet, in his wicker cradle, Jeannot, the last born of the Poitrines, was cutting his teeth. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Thévenin lifted the cradle and smiled at the child, which moaned feebly, worn out with feverishness and convulsions. It must have been very ill, for they had sent for the doctor, the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Pelleport, who, it is true, being a deputy-substitute to the Convention, asked no payment for his visits.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Thévenin, an innkeeper’s daughter herself, was in her element; not satisfied with the way the farm-girl had washed the plates and dishes, she gave an extra wipe to the crockery and glass, an extra polish to the knives and forks. While the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Poitrine was attending to the soup, which she tasted from time to time as a good cook should, Élodie was cutting up into slices a four-pound loaf hot from the oven. Gamelin, when he saw what she was doing, addressed her:</p>
			<p>“A few days ago I read a book written by a young German whose name I have forgotten, and which has been very well translated into French. In it you have a beautiful young girl named Charlotte, who, like you, Élodie, was cutting bread and butter, and like you, cutting it gracefully, and so prettily that at the sight the young Werther fell in love with her.”</p>
			<p>“And it ended in their marrying?” asked Élodie.</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Évariste; “it ended in Werther’s death by violence.”</p>
			<p>They dined well, they were all very hungry; but the fare was indifferent. Jean Blaise complained bitterly; he was a great trencherman and made it a rule of conduct to feed well; and no doubt what urged him to elaborate his gluttony into a system was the general scarcity. In every household the Revolution had overturned the cooking pot. The common run of citizens had nothing to chew upon. Clever folks like Jean Blaise, who made big profits amid the general wretchedness, went to the cookshop where they showed their astuteness by stuffing themselves to repletion. As for Brotteaux who, in this year <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of liberty, was living on chestnuts and bread-crusts, he could remember having supped at Grimod de la Reynière’s at the near end of the Champs Élysées. Eager to win the repute of an accomplished gourmand he reeled off, sitting there before Dame Poitrine’s bacon and cabbages, a string of artful kitchen recipes and wise gastronomic maxims. Presently, when Gamelin protested that a Republican scorns the pleasures of the table, the old financier, always a lover of antiquity, gave the young Spartan the true recipe for the famous black broth.</p>
			<p>After dinner, Jean Blaise, who never forgot business, set his itinerant academy to make studies and sketches of the inn, which struck him as quite romantic in its dilapidation. While Philippe Desmahis and Philippe Dubois were drawing the cow-houses the girl Tronche came out to feed the pigs. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Pelleport, officer of health, who at the same moment appeared at the door of the farm kitchen where he had been bestowing his professional services on the Poitrine baby, stepped up to the artists and after complimenting them on their talents, which were an honour to the whole nation, pointed to the Tronche girl in the middle of her porkers:</p>
			<p>“You see that creature,” he said, “it is not one girl, it is two girls. I speak by the letter, understand that. I was amazed at the extraordinary massiveness of her bony framework and I examined her, to discover she had most of the bones in duplicate⁠—in each thigh two femurs welded together, in each shoulder a double humerus. Some of her muscles are likewise in duplicate. It is a case, in my view, of a pair of twins associated or rather confounded together. It is an interesting phenomenon. I notified Monsieur Saint-Hilaire of the facts, and he thanked me. It is a monster you see before you, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyens</span>. The people here call her ‘the girl Tronche’; they should say ‘the girls Tronches,’ for there are two of them. Nature has these freaks. … Good evening, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyens</span>; we shall have a storm to-night. …”</p>
			<p>After supper by candle-light, the Academy Blaise adjourned to the courtyard where they were joined by a son and daughter of the house in a game of blindman’s-buff, in which the young folks, both men and women, displayed a feverish energy sufficiently accounted for by the high spirits proper to their age without seeking an explanation in the wild and precarious times in which they lived. When it was quite dark, Jean Blaise proposed children’s games in the farm kitchen. Élodie suggested the game of “hunt my heart,” and this was agreed to unanimously. Under the girl’s direction Philippe Desmahis traced in chalk, on different pieces of furniture, on doors and walls, seven hearts, that is to say one less than there were players, for old Brotteaux had obligingly joined the rest. They danced round in a ring singing “La Tour, prends garde!” and at a signal from Élodie, each ran to put a hand on a heart. Gamelin in his absent-minded clumsiness was too late to find one vacant, and had to pay a forfeit, the little knife he had bought for six sous at the fair of Saint-Germain and with which he had cut the loaf for his mother in her poverty. The game went on, and one after the other Blaise, Élodie, Brotteaux and Rose Thévenin failed to touch a heart; each paid a forfeit in turn⁠—a ring, a reticule, a little morocco-bound book, a bracelet. Then the forfeits were raffled on Élodie’s lap, and each player had to redeem his property by showing his society accomplishments⁠—singing a song or reciting a poem. Brotteaux chose the speech of the patron saint of France in the first canto of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Pucelle</i>:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Je suis Denis et saint de mon métier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>J’aime la Gaule, …”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise, though a far less well-read man, replied without hesitation with Richemond’s ripost:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Monsieur le Saint, ce n’était pas la peine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>D’abandonner le céleste domaine. …”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>At that time everybody was reading and re-reading with delight the masterpiece of the French Ariosto; the most serious of men smiled over the loves of Jeanne and Dunois, the adventures of Agnès and Monrose and the exploits of the winged ass. Every man of cultivation knew by heart the choice passages of this diverting and philosophical poem. Évariste Gamelin himself, stern-tempered as he was, when he recovered his twopenny knife from Élodie’s lap, recited the going down of Grisbourdon into hell, with a good deal of spirit. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Thévenin sang without accompaniment Nina’s ballad:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Quand le bien-aimé reviendra.</i>”</p>
			<p>Desmahis sang to the tune of La Faridondaine:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Quelques-uns prirent le cochon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">De ce bon saint Antoine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Et lui mettant un capuchon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ils en firent un moine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Il n’en coûtait que la façon. …”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>All the same Desmahis was in a pensive mood. For the moment he was ardently in love with all the three women with whom he was playing forfeits, and was casting burning looks of soft appeal at each in turn. He loved Rose Thévenin for her grace, her supple figure, her clever acting, her roving glances, and her voice that went straight to a man’s heart; he loved Élodie, because he recognized instinctively her rich endowment of temperament and her kind, complaisant humour; he loved Julienne Hasard, despite her colourless hair, her pale eyelashes, her freckles and her thin bust, because, like Dunois in Voltaire’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Pucelle</i>, he was always ready, in his generosity, to give the least engaging a token of love⁠—and the more so in this instance because she appeared to be for the moment the most neglected, and therefore the most amenable to his attentions. Without a trace of vanity, he was never sure of these being agreeable; nor yet was he ever sure of their not being. So he never omitted to offer them on the chance. Taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the game of forfeits, he made some tender speeches to Rose Thévenin, who showed no displeasure, but could hardly say much in return under the jealous eyes of the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Jean Blaise. He spoke more warmly still to the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Élodie, whom he knew to be pledged to Gamelin, but he was not so exacting as to want a heart all to himself. Élodie could never care for him; but she thought him a handsome fellow and did not altogether succeed in hiding the fact from him. Finally, he whispered his most ardent vows in the ear of the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Hasard, which she received with an air of bewildered stupefaction that might equally express abject submission or chill indifference. And Desmahis did not believe she was indifferent to him.</p>
			<p>The inn contained only two bedrooms, both on the first floor and opening on the same landing. That to the left, the better of the two, boasted a flowered paper and a looking-glass the size of a man’s hand, the gilt frame of which had been blackened by generations of flies since the days when Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> was a child. In it, under sprigged muslin curtains, stood two beds with down pillows, coverlets and counterpanes. This room was reserved for the three <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes</span>.</p>
			<p>When the time came to retire, Desmahis and the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Hasard, each holding a bedroom candlestick, wished each other good-night on the landing. The amorous engraver quickly passed a note to the colourman’s daughter, beseeching her to come to him, when everybody was asleep, in the garret, which was over the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes’</span> chamber.</p>
			<p>With judicious foresight, he had taken care in the course of the day to study the lie of the land and explore the garret in question, which was full of strings of onions, apples and pears left there to ripen with a swarm of wasps crawling over them, chests and old trunks. He had even noticed an old bed of sacking, decrepit and now disused, as far as he could see, and a palliasse, all ripped up and jumping with fleas.</p>
			<p>Facing the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes’</span> room was another of very modest dimensions containing three beds, where the men of the party were to sleep, in such comfort as they might. But Brotteaux, who was a Sybarite, betook himself to the barn to sleep among the hay. As for Jean Blaise, <em>he</em> had disappeared. Dubois and Gamelin were soon asleep. Desmahis went to bed; but no sooner had the silence of night, like a stagnant pool, enveloped the house, than the engraver got up and climbed the wooden staircase, which creaked under his bare feet. The door of the garret stood ajar. From within came a breath of stifling hot air, mingled with the acrid smell of rotting fruit. On the broken-down bed of sacking lay the girl Tronche, fast asleep with her mouth open.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Desmahis returned to his room, where he slept soundly and peacefully till daybreak.</p>
			<p>On the morrow, after a last day’s work, the itinerant Academy took the road back to Paris. When Jean Blaise paid mine host in assignats, the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Poitrine complained bitterly that he never saw what he called “square money” nowadays, and promised a fine candle to the beggar who’d bring back the “yellow boys” again.</p>
			<p>He offered the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyennes</span> their pick of flowers. At his orders, the girl Tronche mounted on a ladder in her sabots and kilted skirts, giving a full view of her noble, much-bespattered calves, and was indefatigable in cutting blossoms from the climbing roses that covered the wall. From her huge hands the flowers fell in showers, in torrents, in avalanches, into the laps of Élodie, Julienne, and Rose Thévenin, who held out their skirts to catch them. The carriage was full of them. The whole party, when they got back at nightfall, carried armfuls home, and their sleeping and waking were perfumed with their fragrance.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
