<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
			<p>While the carts,
escorted by gendarmes, were rumbling along on
their way
to the Place du Trône Renversé, carrying to their
death Brotteaux and
his "accomplices," Évariste sat pensive on a bench in the
garden of the
Tuileries. He was waiting for Élodie. The sun, nearing its
setting, shot
its fiery darts through the leafy chestnuts. At the gate of the garden,
Fame on her winged horse blew her everlasting trumpet. The newspaper
hawkers were bawling the news of the great victory of Fleurus.</p>
			<p>"Yes," thought Gamelin, "victory is ours. We have paid full
price for
it."</p>
			<p>He could see the beaten Generals, disconsolate shades,
trailing in the
blood-stained dust of yonder Place de la Révolution where
they perished.
And he smiled proudly, reflecting that, but for the severities in which
he had borne his share, the Austrian horses would to-day be gnawing the
bark of the trees beside him.</p>
			<p>He soliloquized:</p>
			<p>"Life-giving terror, oh! blessed terror! Last year at this
time, our
heroic defenders were beaten and in rags, the soil of the fatherland
was
invaded, two-thirds of the departments in revolt. Now our armies, well
equipped, well trained, commanded by able generals, are taking the
offensive, ready to bear liberty through the world. Peace reigns over
all the territory of the Republic.... Life-giving terror, oh! blessed
terror! oh! saintly guillotine! Last year at this time, the Republic
was
torn with factions, the hydra of Federalism threatened to devour her.
Now a united Jacobinism spreads over the empire its might and its
wisdom...."</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, he was gloomy. His brow was deeply lined, his
mouth
bitter. His thoughts ran: "We used to say: <i>To conquer or to
die.</i> We
were wrong; it is <i>to conquer and to die</i> we ought to
say."</p>
			<p>He looked about him. Children were building sand-castles. <i>Citoyennes</i>
in their wooden chairs under the trees were sewing or embroidering. The
passers-by, in coat and breeches of elegant cut and strange fashion,
their thoughts fixed on their business or their pleasures, were making
for home. And Gamelin felt himself alone amongst them; he was no
compatriot, no contemporary of theirs. What was it had happened? How
came the enthusiasm of the great years to have been succeeded by
indifference, weariness, perhaps disgust? It was plain to see, these
people never wanted to hear the Revolutionary Tribunal spoken of again
and averted their eyes from the guillotine. Grown too painful a sight
in
the Place de la Révolution, it had been banished to the
extremity of the
Faubourg Antoine. There even, the passage of the tumbrils was greeted
with murmurs. Voices, it was said, had been heard to shout: "Enough!"</p>
			<p>Enough, when there were still traitors, conspirators! Enough,
when the
Committees must be reformed, the Convention purged! Enough, when
scoundrels disgraced the National representation. Enough, when they
were
planning the downfall of <i>The Just!</i> For, dreadful
thought, but only too
true! Fouquier himself was weaving plots, and it was to ruin Maximilien
that he had sacrificed with solemn ceremony fifty-seven victims haled
to
death in the red sheet of parricides. France was giving way to
pity—and
pity was a crime! Then we should have saved her in spite of herself,
and
when she cried for mercy, stopped our ears and struck! Alas! the fates
had decided otherwise; the fatherland was for cursing its saviours.
Well, let it curse, if only it may be saved!</p>
			<p>"It is not enough to immolate obscure victims, aristocrats,
financiers,
publicists, poets, a Lavoisier, a Roucher, an André
Chénier. We must
strike these all-puissant malefactors who, with hands full of gold and
dripping with blood, are plotting the ruin of <i>the Mountain</i>—the
Fouchers, Talliens, Rovères, Carriers, Bourdons. We must
deliver the
State from all its enemies. If Hébert had triumphed, the
Convention was
overthrown, the Republic hastening to the abyss; if Desmoulins and
Danton had triumphed, the Convention had lost its virtue, ready to
surrender the Republic to the aristocrats, the money-jobbers and the
Generals. If men like Tallien and Foucher, monsters gorged with blood
and rapine, triumph, France is overwhelmed in a welter of crime and
infamy ... Robespierre, awake; when criminals, drunken with fury and
affright, plan your death and the death of freedom! Couthon,
Saint-Just,
make haste; why tarry ye to denounce the plots?</p>
			<p>"Why! the old-time state, the Royal monster, assured its
empire by
imprisoning every year four hundred thousand persons, by hanging
fifteen
thousand, by breaking three thousand on the wheel—and the
Republic
still hesitates to sacrifice a few hundred heads for its security and
domination! Let us drown in blood and save the fatherland...."</p>
			<p>He was buried in these thoughts when Élodie hurried
up to him,
pale-faced and distraught:</p>
			<p>"Évariste, what have you to say to me? Why not come
to the <i>Amour
peintre</i> to the blue chamber? Why have you made me come here?"</p>
			<p>"To bid you an eternal farewell."</p>
			<p>He had lost his wits, she faltered, she could not
understand....</p>
			<p>He stopped her with a very slight movement of the hand:</p>
			<p>"Élodie, I cannot any more accept your love."</p>
			<p>She begged him to walk on further; people could see them,
overhear them,
where they were.</p>
			<p>He moved on a score of yards, and resumed, very quietly:</p>
			<p>"I have made sacrifices to my country of my life and my
honour. I shall
die infamous; I shall have naught to leave you, unhappy girl, save an
execrated memory.... We, love? Can anyone love me still?... Can I love?"</p>
			<p>She told him he was mad; that she loved him, that she would
always love
him. She was ardent, sincere; but she felt as well as he, she felt
better than he, that he was right. But she fought against the evidence
of her senses.</p>
			<p>He went on:</p>
			<p>"I blame myself for nothing. What I have done, I would do
again. I have
made myself anathema for my country's sake. I am accursed. I have put
myself outside humanity; I shall never re-enter its pale. No, the great
task is not finished. Oh! clemency, forgiveness!—Do the
traitors
forgive? Are the conspirators clement? scoundrels, parricides multiply
unceasingly; they spring up from underground, they swarm in from all
our
frontiers,—young men, who would have done better to perish
with our
armies, old men, children, women, with every mark of innocence, purity,
and grace. They are offered up a sacrifice,—and more victims
are ready
for the knife!... You can see, Élodie, I must needs renounce
love,
renounce all joy, all sweetness of life, renounce life itself."</p>
			<p>He fell silent. Born to taste tranquil joys, Élodie
not for the first
time was appalled to find, under the tragic kisses of a lover like
Évariste, her voluptuous transports blended with images of
horror and
bloodshed; she offered no reply. To Évariste the girl's
silence was as a
draught of a bitter chalice.</p>
			<p>"Yes, you can see, Élodie, we are on a precipice;
our deeds devour us.
Our days, our hours are years. I shall soon have lived a century. Look
at this brow! Is it a lover's? Love!..."</p>
			<p>"Évariste, you are mine, I will not let you go; I
will not give you back
your freedom."</p>
			<p>She was speaking in the language of sacrifice. He felt it; she
felt it
herself.</p>
			<p>"Will you be able, Élodie, one day to bear witness
that I lived faithful
to my duty, that my heart was upright and my soul unsullied, that I
knew
no passion but the public good; that I was born to feel and love? Will
you say: 'He did his duty'? But no! You will not say it and I do not
ask
you to say it. Perish my memory! My glory is in my own heart; shame
beleaguers me about. If you love me, never speak my name; eternal
silence is best."</p>
			<p>A child of eight or nine, trundling its hoop, ran just then
between
Gamelin's legs.</p>
			<p>He lifted the boy suddenly in his arms:</p>
			<p>"Child, you will grow up free, happy, and you will owe it to
the
infamous Gamelin. I am ferocious, that you may be happy. I am cruel,
that you may be kind; I am pitiless, that to-morrow all Frenchmen may
embrace with tears of joy."</p>
			<p>He pressed the child to his breast.</p>
			<p>"Little one, when you are a man, you will owe your happiness,
your
innocence to me; and, if ever you hear my name uttered, you will
execrate it."</p>
			<p>Then he put down the child, which ran away in terror to cling
to its
mother's skirts, who had hurried up to the rescue. The young mother,
who
was pretty and charming in her aristocratic grace, with her gown of
white lawn, carried off the boy with a haughty look.</p>
			<p>Gamelin turned his eyes on Élodie:</p>
			<p>"I have held the child in my arms; perhaps I shall send the
mother to
the guillotine,"—and he walked away with long strides under
the ordered
trees.</p>
			<p>Élodie stood a moment motionless, her eyes fixed on
the ground. Then,
suddenly, she darted after her lover, and frenzied, dishevelled, like a
Mænad, she gripped him as if to tear him in pieces and cried
in a voice
choked with blood and tears:</p>
			<p>"Well, then! me too, my beloved, send me to the guillotine; me
too, lay
me under the knife!"</p>
			<p>And, at the thought of the knife at her neck, all her flesh
melted in an
ecstasy of horror and voluptuous transport.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
