<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>Meantime Julie Gamelin, in her bottle-green box-coat, went every day to the Luxembourg Gardens and there, on a bench at the end of one of the avenues, sat waiting for the moment when her lover should show his face at one of the dormers of the Palace. Then they would beckon to each other and talk together in a language of signs they had invented. In this way she learned that the prisoner occupied a fairly good room and had pleasant companions, that he wanted a blanket for his bed and a kettle and loved his mistress fondly.</p>
			<p>She was not the only one to watch for the sight of a dear face at a window of the Palace now turned into a prison. A young mother not far from her kept her eyes fixed on a closed casement; then directly she saw it open, she would lift her little one in her arms above her head. An old lady in a lace veil sat for long hours on a folding-chair, vainly hoping to catch a momentary glimpse of her son, who, for fear of breaking down, never left his game of quoits in the courtyard of the prison till the hour when the gardens were closed.</p>
			<p>During these long hours of waiting, whether the sky were blue or overcast, a man of middle age, rather stout and very neatly dressed, was constantly to be seen on a neighbouring bench, playing with his snuffbox and the charms on his watch-guard or unfolding a newspaper, which he never read. He was dressed like a bourgeois of the old school in a gold-laced cocked hat, a plum-coloured coat and blue waistcoat embroidered in silver. He looked well-meaning enough, and was something of a musician to judge by a flute, one end of which peeped from his pocket. Never for a moment did his eyes wander from the supposed stripling, on whom he bestowed continual smiles, and when he saw him leave his seat, he would get up himself and follow him at a distance. Julie, in her misery and loneliness, was touched by the discreet sympathy the good man manifested.</p>
			<p>One day, as she was leaving the gardens, it began to rain; the old fellow stepped up to her and, opening his vast red umbrella, asked permission to offer her its shelter. She answered sweetly, in her clear treble, that she would be very glad. But at the sound of her voice and warned perhaps by a subtle scent of womanhood, he strode rapidly away, leaving the girl exposed to the rainstorm; she took in the situation, and, despite her gnawing anxieties, could not restrain a smile.</p>
			<p>Julie lived in an attic in the Rue du Cherche-Midi and represented herself as a draper’s shop-boy in search of employment; the widow Gamelin, at last convinced that the girl was running smaller risks anywhere else than at her home, had got her away from the Place de Thionville and the Section du Pont-Neuf, and was giving her all the help she could in the way of food and linen. Julie did her trifle of cooking, went to the Luxembourg to see her beloved prisoner and back again to her garret; the monotony of the life was a balm to her grief, and, being young and strong, she slept well and soundly the night through. She was of a fearless temper and broken in to an adventurous life; the costume she wore added perhaps a further spice of excitement, and she would sometimes sally out at night to visit a restaurateur’s in the Rue du Four, at the sign of the Red Cross, a place frequented by men of all sorts and conditions and women of gallantry. There she read the papers or played backgammon with some tradesman’s clerk or citizen-soldier, who smoked his pipe in her face. Drinking, gambling, lovemaking were the order of the day, and scuffles were not unfrequent. One evening a customer, hearing a trampling of hoofs on the paved roadway outside, lifted the curtain, and recognizing the Commandant-in-Chief of the National Guard, the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Hanriot, who was riding past with his Staff, muttered between his teeth:</p>
			<p>“There goes Robespierre’s jackass!”</p>
			<p>Julie overheard and burst into a loud guffaw.</p>
			<p>But a moustachioed patriot took up the challenge roundly:</p>
			<p>“Whoever says that,” he shouted, “is a bl⁠—sted aristocrat, and I should like to see the fellow sneeze into Samson’s basket. I tell you General Hanriot is a good patriot who’ll know how to defend Paris and the Convention at a pinch. That’s why the Royalists can’t forgive him.”</p>
			<p>Glaring at Julie, who was still laughing, the patriot added:</p>
			<p>“You there, greenhorn, have a care I don’t land you a kick in the backside to learn you to respect good patriots.”</p>
			<p>But other voices were joining in:</p>
			<p>“Hanriot’s a drunken sot and a fool!”</p>
			<p>“Hanriot’s a good Jacobin! Vive Hanriot!”</p>
			<p>Sides were taken, and the fray began. Blows were exchanged, hats battered in, tables overturned, and glasses shivered; the lights went out and the women began to scream. Two or three patriots fell upon Julie, who seized hold of a settle in self-defence; she was brought to the ground, where she scratched and bit her assailants. Her coat flew open and her neckerchief was torn, revealing her panting bosom. A patrol came running up at the noise, and the girl aristocrat escaped between the gendarmes’ legs.</p>
			<p>Every day the carts were full of victims for the guillotine.</p>
			<p>“But I cannot, I cannot let my lover die!” Julie would tell her mother.</p>
			<p>She resolved to beg his life, to take what steps were possible, to go to the Committees and Public Departments, to canvas Representatives, Magistrates, to visit anyone who could be of help. She had no woman’s dress to wear. Her mother borrowed a striped gown, a kerchief, a lace coif from the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Blaise, and Julie, attired as a woman and a patriot, set out for the abode of one of the judges, Renaudin, a damp, dismal house in the Rue Mazarine.</p>
			<p>With trembling steps she climbed the wooden, tiled stairs and was received by the judge in his squalid cabinet, furnished with a deal table and two straw-bottomed chairs. The wallpaper hung in strips. Renaudin, with black hair plastered on his forehead, a lowering eye, tucked-in lips, and a protuberant chin, signed to her to speak and listened in silence.</p>
			<p>She told him she was the sister of the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Chassagne, a prisoner at the Luxembourg, explained as speciously as she could the circumstances under which he had been arrested, represented him as an innocent man, the victim of mischance, pleaded more and more urgently; but he remained callous and unsympathetic.</p>
			<p>She fell at his feet in supplication and burst into tears.</p>
			<p>No sooner did he see her tears than his face changed; his dark bloodshot eyes lit up, and his heavy blue jowl worked as if pumping up the saliva in his dry throat.</p>
			<p>“<span xml:lang="fr">Citoyenne</span>, we will do what is necessary. You need have no anxiety,”⁠—and opening a door, he pushed the petitioner into a little sitting-room, with rose-pink hangings, painted panels, Dresden china figures, a timepiece and gilt candelabra; for furniture it contained settees, and a sofa covered in tapestry and adorned with a pastoral group after Boucher. Julie was ready for anything to save her lover.</p>
			<p>Renaudin had his way⁠—rapidly and brutally. When she got up, readjusting the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne’s</span> pretty frock, she met the man’s cruel mocking eye; instantly she knew she had made her sacrifice in vain.</p>
			<p>“You promised me my brother’s freedom,” she said.</p>
			<p>He chuckled.</p>
			<p>“I told you, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span>, we would do what was necessary⁠—that is to say, we should apply the law, neither more nor less. I told you to have no anxiety⁠—and why should you be anxious? The Revolutionary Tribunal is always just.”</p>
			<p>She thought of throwing herself upon the man, biting him, tearing out his eyes. But, realizing she would only be consummating Fortuné Chassagne’s ruin, she rushed from the house, and fled to her garret to take off Élodie’s soiled and desecrated frock. All night she lay, screaming with grief and rage.</p>
			<p>Next day, on returning to the Luxembourg, she found the gardens occupied by gendarmes, who were turning out the women and children. Sentinels were posted in the avenues to prevent the passersby from communicating with the prisoners. The young mother, who used to come every day, carrying her child in her arms, told Julie that there was talk of plotting in the prisons and that the women were blamed for gathering in the gardens in order to rouse the people’s pity in favour of aristocrats and traitors.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
