<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
			<p>Évariste Gamelin was worn out and could not rest; twenty times in the night he would awake with a start from a sleep haunted by nightmares. It was only in the blue chamber, in Élodie’s arms, that he could snatch a few hours’ slumber. He talked and cried out in his sleep and used often to awake her; but she could make nothing of what he said.</p>
			<p>One morning, after a night when he had seen the Eumenides, he started awake, broken with terror and weak as a child. The dawn was piercing the window curtains with its wan arrows. Évariste’s hair, lying tangled on his brow, covered his eyes with a black veil; Élodie, by the bedside, was gently parting the wild locks. She was looking at him now, with a sister’s tenderness, while with her handkerchief she wiped away the icy sweat from the unhappy man’s forehead. Then he remembered that fine scene in the <i>Orestes</i> of Euripides, which he had essayed to represent in a picture that, if he could have finished it, would have been his masterpiece⁠—the scene where the unhappy Electra wipes away the spume that sullies her brother’s lips. And he seemed to hear Élodie also saying in a gentle voice:</p>
			<p>“Hear me, beloved brother, while the Furies leave you master of your reason …”</p>
			<p>And he thought:</p>
			<p>“And yet I am no parricide. Far from it, it is filial piety has made me shed the tainted blood of the enemies of my fatherland.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
