<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
			<p>There seemed no end to these trials for conspiracy in the prisons. Forty-nine accused crowded the tiers of seats. Maurice Brotteaux occupied the right-hand corner of the topmost row⁠—the place of honour. He was dressed in his plum-coloured surtout, which he had brushed very carefully the day before and mended at the pocket where his little Lucretius had ended by fretting a hole. Beside him sat the woman Rochemaure, painted and powdered and patched, a brilliant and ghastly figure. They had put the Père Longuemare between her and the girl Athenaïs, who had recovered her look of youthful freshness at the Madelonnettes.</p>
			<p>On the platform the gendarmes massed a number of other prisoners unknown to any of our friends, and who, as likely as not, knew nothing of each other⁠—yet accomplices one and all⁠—lawyers, journalists, ci-devant nobles, citizens, and citizens’ wives. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Rochemaure caught sight of Gamelin on the jurors’ bench. He had not answered her urgent letters and repeated messages; still she had not abandoned hope and threw him a look of supplication, trying to appear fascinating and pathetic for him. But the young juror’s cold glance robbed her of any illusion she might have entertained.</p>
			<p>The Clerk read the act of accusation, which, succinct as was its reference to each individual, was a lengthy document because of the great number accused. It began by exposing in general outline the plot concocted in the prisons to drown the Republic in the blood of the Representatives of the nation and the people of Paris; then, coming to each severally, it went on:</p>
			<p>“One of the most mischievous authors of this abominable conspiracy is the man Brotteaux, once known as des Ilettes, receiver of imposts under the tyrant. This person, who was remarkable, even in the days of tyranny, for his libertine behaviour, is a sure proof how dissoluteness and immorality are the greatest enemies of the liberty and happiness of peoples; as a fact, after misappropriating the public revenues and wasting in debauchery a noticeable part of the people’s patrimony, the person in question connived with his former concubine, the woman Rochemaure, to enter into correspondence with the émigrés and traitorously keep the faction of the foreigner informed of the state of our finances, the movements of our troops, the fluctuations of public opinion.</p>
			<p>“Brotteaux, who, at this period of his despicable life, was living in concubinage with a prostitute he had picked up in the mud of the Rue Fromenteau, the girl Athenaïs, easily suborned her to his purposes and made use of her to foment the counterrevolution by impudent and unpatriotic cries and indecent and traitorous speeches.</p>
			<p>“Sundry remarks of this ill-omened individual will afford you a clear indication of his abject views and pernicious purpose. Speaking of the patriotic tribunal now called upon to punish him, he declared insultingly⁠—‘The Revolutionary Tribunal is like a play of William Shakespeare, who mixes up with the most bloodthirsty scenes the most trivial buffooneries.’ Then he was forever preaching atheism, as the surest means of degrading the people and driving it into immorality. In the prison of the Conciergerie, where he was confined, he used to deplore as among the worst of calamities the victories of our valiant armies, and tried to throw suspicion on the most patriotic Generals, crediting them with designs of tyrannicide. ‘Only wait,’ he would say in atrocious language which the pen is loath to reproduce, ‘only wait till, some day, one of these warriors, to whom you owe your salvation, swallows you all up as the stork in the fable gobbled up the frogs.’</p>
			<p>“The woman Rochemaure, a ci-devant noble, concubine of Brotteaux, is not less culpable than he. Not only was she in correspondence with the foreigner and in the pay of Pitt himself, but in complicity with swindlers, such as Jullien (of Toulouse) and Chabot, associates of the ci-devant Baron de Batz, she seconded that reprobate in all sorts of cunning machinations to depreciate the shares of the Company of the Indies, buy them in at a cheap price, and then raise the quotation by artifices of an opposite tendency, to the confusion and ruin of private fortunes and of the public funds. Incarcerated at La Bourbe and the Madelonnettes, she never ceased in prison to conspire, to dabble in stocks and shares and to devote herself to attempts at corruption, to suborn judges and jury.</p>
			<p>“Louis Longuemare, ex-noble, ex-capuchin, had long been practised in infamy and crime before committing the acts of treason for which he has to answer here. Living in a shameful promiscuity with the girl Gorcut, known as Athenaïs, under Brotteaux’s very roof, he is the accomplice of the said girl and the said ci-devant nobleman. During his imprisonment at the Conciergerie he has never ceased for one single day writing pamphlets aimed at the subversion of public liberty and security.</p>
			<p>“It is right to say, with regard to Marthe Gorcut, known as Athenaïs, that prostitutes are the greatest scourge of public morality, which they insult, and the opprobrium of the society which they disgrace. But why speak at length of revolting crimes which the accused confesses shamelessly … ?”</p>
			<p>The accusation then proceeded to pass in review the fifty-four other prisoners, none of whom either Brotteaux, or the Père Longuemare, or the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Rochemaure, were acquainted with, except for having seen several of them in the prisons, but who were one and all included with the first named in “this odious plot, with which the annals of the nation can furnish nothing to compare.”</p>
			<p>The piece concluded by demanding the penalty of death for all the culprits.</p>
			<p>Brotteaux was the first to be examined:</p>
			<p>“You were in the plot?”</p>
			<p>“No, I have been in no plots. Every word is untrue in the act of accusation I have just heard read.”</p>
			<p>“There, you see; you are plotting still, at this moment, to discredit the Tribunal,”⁠—and the President went on to the woman Rochemaure, who answered with despairing protestations of innocence, tears and quibblings.</p>
			<p>The Père Longuemare referred himself purely and entirely to God’s will. He had not even brought his written defence with him.</p>
			<p>All the questions put to him he answered in a spirit of resignation. Only, when the President spoke of him as a Capuchin, did the old Adam wake again in him:</p>
			<p>“I am not a Capuchin,” he said, “I am a priest and a monk of the Order of the Barnabites.”</p>
			<p>“It is the same thing,” returned the President good-naturedly.</p>
			<p>The Père Longuemare looked at him indignantly:</p>
			<p>“One cannot conceive a more extraordinary error,” he cried, “than to confound with a Capuchin a monk of this Order of the Barnabites which derives its constitutions from the Apostle Paul himself.”</p>
			<p>The remark was greeted with a burst of laughter and hooting from the spectators, at which the Père Longuemare, taking this derision to betoken a denial of his proposition, announced that he would die a member of this Order of <abbr>St.</abbr> Barnabas, the habit of which he wore in his heart.</p>
			<p>“Do you admit,” asked the President, “entering into plots with the girl Gorcut, known as Athenaïs, the same who accorded you her despicable favours?”</p>
			<p>At the question, the Père Longuemare raised his eyes sorrowfully to heaven, but made no answer; his silence expressed the surprise of an unsophisticated mind and the gravity of a man of religion who fears to utter empty words.</p>
			<p>“You, the girl Gorcut,” the President asked, turning to Athenaïs, “do you admit plotting in conjunction with Brotteaux?”</p>
			<p>Her answer was softly spoken:</p>
			<p>“Monsieur Brotteaux, to my knowledge, has done nothing but good. He is a man of the sort we should have more of; there is no better sort. Those who say the contrary are mistaken. That is all I have to say.”</p>
			<p>The President asked her if she admitted having lived in concubinage with Brotteaux. The expression had to be explained to her, as she did not understand it. But, directly she gathered what the question meant, she answered, that would only have depended on him, but he had never asked her.</p>
			<p>There was a laugh in the public galleries, and the President threatened the girl Gorcut to refuse her a hearing if she answered in such a cynical sort again.</p>
			<p>At this she broke out, calling him sneak, sour face, cuckold, and spewing out over him, judges, and jury a torrent of invective, till the gendarmes dragged her from her bench and hustled her out of the hall.</p>
			<p>The President then proceeded to a brief examination of the rest of the accused, taking them in the order in which they sat on the tiers of benches.</p>
			<p>One, a man named Navette, pleaded that he could not have plotted in prison where he had only spent four days. The President observed that the point deserved to be considered, and begged the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyens</span> of the jury to make a note of it. A certain Bellier said the same, and the President made the same remark to the jury in his favour. This mildness on the judge’s part was interpreted by some as the result of a praiseworthy scrupulosity, by others as payment due in recognition of their talents as informers.</p>
			<p>The Deputy of the Public Prosecutor spoke next. All he did was to amplify the details of the act of accusation and then to put the question:</p>
			<p>“Is it proven that Maurice Brotteaux, Louise Rochemaure, Louis Longuemare, Marthe Gorcut, known as Athenaïs, Eusèbe Rocher, Pierre Guyton-Fabulet, Marcelline Descourtis, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are guilty of forming a conspiracy, the means whereof are assassination, starvation, the making of forged assignats and false coin, the depravation of morals and public spirit; the aim and object, civil war, the abolition of the National representation, the re-establishment of Royalty?”</p>
			<p>The jurors withdrew into the chamber of deliberation. They voted unanimously in the affirmative, only excepting the cases of the afore-named Navette and Bellier, whom the President, and following his lead, the Public Prosecutor, had put, as it were, in a separate class by themselves.</p>
			<p>Gamelin stated the motives for his decision thus:</p>
			<p>“The guilt of the accused is self-evident; the safety of the Nation demands their chastisement, and they ought themselves to desire their punishment as the only means of expiating their crimes.”</p>
			<p>The President pronounced sentence in the absence of those it concerned. In these great days, contrary to what the law prescribed, the condemned were not called back again to hear their judgment read, no doubt for fear of the effects of despair on so large a number of prisoners. A needless apprehension, so extraordinary and so general was the submissiveness of the victims in those days! The Clerk of the Court came down to the cells to read the verdict, which was listened to with such silence and impassivity as made it a common comparison to liken the condemned of Prairial to trees marked down for felling.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Rochemaure declared herself pregnant. A surgeon, who was likewise one of the jury, was directed to see her. She was carried out fainting to her dungeon.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” sighed the Père Longuemare, “these judges and jurors are men very deserving of pity; their state of mind is truly deplorable. They mix up everything and confound a Barnabite with a Franciscan.”</p>
			<p>The execution was to take place the same day at the Barrière du Trone-Renversé. The condemned, their toilet completed, hair cropped and shirt cut down at the neck, waited for the headsman, packed like cattle in the small room separated off from the Gaoler’s office by a glazed partition.</p>
			<p>When presently the executioner and his men arrived, Brotteaux, who was quietly reading his Lucretius, put the marker at the page he had begun, shut the book, stuffed it in the pocket of his coat, and said to the Barnabite:</p>
			<p>“What enrages me, Reverend Father, is that I shall never convince you. We are going both of us to sleep our last sleep, and I shall not be able to twitch you by the sleeve and tell you: ‘There you see; you have neither sensation nor consciousness left; you are inanimate. What comes after life is like what goes before.’ ”</p>
			<p>He tried to smile; but an atrocious spasm of pain wrung his heart and vitals, and he came near fainting.</p>
			<p>He resumed, however:</p>
			<p>“Father, I let you see my weakness. I love life and I do not leave it without regret.”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” replied the monk gently, “take heed, you are a braver man than I, and nevertheless death troubles you more. What does that mean, if not that I see the light, which you do not see yet?”</p>
			<p>“Might it not also be,” said Brotteaux, “that I regret life because I have enjoyed it better than you, who have made it as close a copy of death as possible?”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said the Père Longuemare, his face paling, “this is a solemn moment. God help me! It is plain we shall die without spiritual aid. It must be that in other days I have received the sacraments lukewarmly and with a thankless heart, for Heaven to refuse me them to-day, when I have such pressing need of them.”</p>
			<p>The carts were waiting. The condemned were loaded into them pell-mell, with hands tied. The woman Rochemaure, whose pregnancy had not been verified by the surgeon, was hoisted into one of the tumbrils. She recovered a little of her old energy to watch the crowd of onlookers, hoping against hope to find rescuers amongst them. The throng was less dense than formerly, and the excitement less extreme. Only a few women screamed, “Death! death!” or mocked those who were to die. The men mostly shrugged their shoulders, looked another way, and said nothing, whether out of prudence or from respect of the laws.</p>
			<p>A shudder went through the crowd when Athenaïs emerged from the wicket. She looked a mere child.</p>
			<p>She bowed her head before the monk:</p>
			<p>“Monsieur le Curé,” she asked him, “give me absolution.”</p>
			<p>The Père Longuemare gravely recited the sacramental words in muttered tones; then:</p>
			<p>“My daughter!” he added, “you have fallen into great disorders of living; but can I offer the Lord a heart as simple as yours? Would I were sure!”</p>
			<p>She climbed lightly into the cart. And there, throwing out her bosom and proudly lifting her girlish head, she cried “Vive le Roi!”</p>
			<p>She made a little sign to Brotteaux to show him there was a vacant place beside her. Brotteaux helped the Barnabite to get in and came and placed himself between the monk and the simple-hearted girl.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said the Père Longuemare to the Epicurean philosopher, “I ask you a favour; this God in whom you do not yet believe, pray to Him for me. It is far from sure you are not nearer to Him than I am myself; a moment can decide this. A second, and you may be called by the Lord to be His highly favoured son. Sir, pray for me.”</p>
			<p>While the wheels were grinding over the pavement of the long Faubourg Antoine, the monk was busy, with heart and lips, reciting the prayers of the dying. Brotteaux’s mind was fixed on recalling the lines of the poet of nature: <i xml:lang="la">Sic ubi non erimus</i>. … Bound as he was and shaken in the vile, jolting cart, he preserved his calm and even showed a certain solicitude to maintain an easy posture. At his side, Athenaïs, proud to die like the Queen of France, surveyed the crowd with haughty looks, and the old financier, noting as a connoisseur the girl’s white bosom, was filled with regret for the light of day.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
