<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>VI</h2>
			<p>Ten
o'clock in the forenoon. Not a breath of wind. It was the
hottest
July ever known. In the narrow Rue de Jérusalem a hundred or
so citizens
of the Section were waiting in queue at the baker's door, under the eye
of four National Guards who stood at ease smoking their pipes.</p>
			<p>The National Convention had decreed the <i>maximum</i>,—and
instantly corn
and flour had disappeared. Like the Israelites in the wilderness, the
Parisians had to rise before daybreak if they wished to eat. The crowd
was lined up, men, women and children tightly packed together, under a
sky of molten lead. The heat beat down on the rotting foulness of the
kennels and exaggerated the stench of unwashed, sweating humanity. All
were pushing, abusing their neighbours, exchanging looks fraught with
every sort of emotion one human being can feel for
another,—dislike,
disgust, interest, attraction, indifference. Painful experience had
taught them there was not bread enough for everybody; so the late
comers
were always trying to push forward, while those who lost ground
complained bitterly and indignantly and vainly claimed their rights.
Women shoved and elbowed savagely to keep their place or squeeze into a
better. When the press grew too intolerable, cries rose of "Stop
pushing
there!" while each and all protested they could not help
it—it was
someone else pushing them.</p>
			<p>To obviate these daily scenes of disorder, the officials
appointed by
the Section had conceived the notion of fastening a rope to the
shop-door which each applicant held in his proper order; but hands at
such close quarters <i>would</i> come in contact on the
rope and a struggle
would result. Whoever lost hold could never recover it, while the
disappointed and the mischievously inclined sometimes cut the cord. In
the end the plan had to be abandoned.</p>
			<p>On this occasion there was the usual suffocation and
confusion. While
some swore they were dying, others indulged in jokes or loose remarks;
all abused the aristocrats and federalists, authors of all the misery.
When a dog ran by, wags hailed the beast as Pitt. More than once a loud
slap showed that some <i>citoyenne</i> in the line had
resented with a
vigorous hand the insolence of a lewd admirer, while, pressed close
against her neighbour, a young servant girl, with eyes half shut and
mouth half open, stood sighing in a sort of trance. At any word, or
gesture, or attitude of a sort to provoke the sportive humour of the
coarse-minded populace, a knot of young libertines would strike up the
<i>Ça-ira</i> in chorus, regardless of the
protests of an old Jacobin, highly
indignant to see a dirty meaning attached to a refrain expressive of
the
Republican faith in a future of justice and happiness.</p>
			<p>His ladder under his arm, a billsticker appeared to post up on
a blank
wall facing the baker's a proclamation by the Commune apportioning the
rations of butcher's-meat. Passers-by halted to read the notice, still
sticky with paste. A cabbage vendor going by, basket on back, began
calling out in her loud cracked voice:</p>
			<p>"They'm all gone, the purty oxen! best rake up the guts!"</p>
			<p>Suddenly such an appalling stench of putrefaction rose from a
sewer near
by that several people were turned sick; a woman was taken ill and
handed over in a fainting condition to a couple of National Guards, who
carried her off to a pump a few yards away. All held their noses, and
fell to growling and grumbling, exchanging conjectures each more
ghastly
and alarming than the last. What was it? a dead animal buried
thereabouts, a dead fish, perhaps, put in for mischief's sake, or more
likely a victim of the September massacres, some noble or priest, left
to rot in a cellar.</p>
			<p>"They buried them in cellars, eh?"</p>
			<p>"They got rid of 'em anywhere and anyhow."</p>
			<p>"It will be one of the Châtelet prisoners. On the
2nd I saw three
hundred in a heap on the Port au Change."</p>
			<p>The Parisians dreaded the vengeance of these aristocrats who
were like
to poison them with their dead bodies.</p>
			<p>Évariste Gamelin joined the line; he was resolved
to spare his old
mother the fatigues of the long wait. His neighbour, the <i>citoyen</i>
Brotteaux, went with him, calm and smiling, his Lucretius in the baggy
pocket of his plum-coloured coat.</p>
			<p>The good old fellow enjoyed the scene, calling it a bit of low
life
worthy the brush of a modern Teniers.</p>
			<p>"These street-porters and goodwives," he declared, "are more
amusing
than the Greeks and Romans our painters are so fond of nowadays. For my
part, I have always admired the Flemish style."</p>
			<p>One fact he was too sensible and tactful to
mention—that he had
himself owned a gallery of Dutch masters rivalled only by Monsieur de
Choiseul's in the number and excellence of the examples.</p>
			<p>"Nothing is beautiful save the Antique," returned the painter,
"and what
is inspired by it. Still, I grant you these low-life scenes by Teniers,
Jan Steen or Ostade are better stuff than the frills and furbelows of
Watteau, Boucher, or Van Loo; humanity is shown in an ugly light, but
it
is not degraded as it is by a Baudouin or a Fragonard."</p>
			<p>A hawker went by bawling:</p>
			<p>"<i>Bulletin of the Revolutionary Tribunal!</i>...
list of the condemned!"</p>
			<p>"One Revolutionary Tribunal is not enough," said Gamelin,
"there should
be one in every town ... in every town, do I say?—nay, in
every
village, in every hamlet. Fathers of families, citizens, one and all,
should constitute themselves judges. At a time when the enemy's cannon
is at her gates and the assassin's dagger at her throat, the Nation
must
hold mercy to be parricide. What! Lyons, Marseilles, Bordeaux in
insurrection, Corsica in revolt, La Vendée on fire, Mayence
and
Valenciennes in the hands of the Coalition, treason in the country,
town
and camp, treason sitting on the very benches of the National
Convention, treason assisting, map in hand, at the council board of our
Commanders in the field!... The fatherland is in danger—and
the
guillotine must save her!"</p>
			<p>"I have no objection on principle to make to the guillotine,"
replied
Brotteaux. "Nature, my only mistress and my only instructress,
certainly
offers me no suggestion to the effect that a man's life is of any
value;
on the contrary, she teaches in all kinds of ways that it is of none.
The sole end and object of living beings seems to be to serve as food
for other beings destined to the same end. Murder is of natural right;
therefore, the penalty of death is lawful, on condition it is exercised
from no motives either of virtue or of justice, but by necessity or to
gain some profit thereby. However, I must have perverse instincts, for
I
sicken to see blood flow, and this defect of character all my
philosophy
has failed so far to correct."</p>
			<p>"Republicans," answered Évariste, "are humane and
full of feeling. It is
only despots hold the death penalty to be a necessary attribute of
authority. The sovereign people will do away with it one day.
Robespierre fought against it, and all good patriots were with him; the
law abolishing it cannot be too soon promulgated. But it will not have
to be applied till the last foe of the Republic has perished beneath
the
sword of law and order."</p>
			<p>Gamelin and Brotteaux had by this time a number of late comers
behind
them and amongst these several women of the Section, including a
stalwart, handsome <i>tricoteuse</i>, in head-kerchief and
sabots, wearing a
sword in a shoulder belt, a pretty girl with a mop of golden hair and a
very tumbled neckerchief, and a young mother, pale and thin, giving the
breast to a sickly infant.</p>
			<p>The child, which could get no milk, was screaming, but its
voice was
weak and stifled by its sobs. Pitifully small, with a pallid, unhealthy
skin and inflamed eyes, the mother gazed at it with mingled anxiety and
grief.</p>
			<p>"He is very young," observed Gamelin, turning to look at the
unhappy
infant groaning just at his back, half stifled amid the crowd of new
arrivals.</p>
			<p>"He is six months, poor love!... His father is with the army;
he is one
of the men who drove back the Austrians at Condé. His name
is Dumonteil
(Michel), a draper's assistant by trade. He enlisted at a booth they
had
established in front of the Hôtel de Ville. Poor lad, he was
all for
defending his country and seeing the world.... He writes telling me to
be patient. But pray, how am I to feed Paul (he's called Paul, you
know)
when I can't feed myself?"</p>
			<p>"Oh, dear!" exclaimed the pretty girl with the flaxen hair,
"we've got
another hour before us yet, and to-night we shall have to repeat the
same ceremony over again at the grocer's. You risk your life to get
three eggs and a quarter of a pound of butter."</p>
			<p>"Butter!" sighed the <i>citoyenne</i> Dumonteil,
"why, it's three months
since I've seen a scrap!"</p>
			<p>And a chorus of female voices rose, bewailing the scarcity and
dearness
of provisions, cursing the <i>émigrés</i>
and devoting to the guillotine the
Commissaries of Sections who were ready to give good-for-nothing
minxes,
in return for unmentionable services, fat hens and four-pound loaves.
Alarming stories passed round of cattle drowned in the Seine, sacks of
flour emptied in the sewers, loaves of bread thrown into the
latrines.... It was all those Royalists, and Rolandists, and
Brissotins,
who were starving the people, bent on exterminating every living thing
in Paris!</p>
			<p>All of a sudden the pretty, fair-haired girl with the rumpled
neckerchief broke into shrieks as if her petticoats were afire. She was
shaking these violently and turning out her pockets, vociferating that
somebody had stolen her purse.</p>
			<p>At news of the petty theft, a flood of indignation swept over
this crowd
of poor folks, the same who had sacked the mansions of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain and invaded the Tuileries without appropriating the
smallest thing, artisans and housewives, who would have burned down the
Palace of Versailles with a light heart, but would have thought it a
dire disgrace if they had stolen the value of a pin. The young rakes
greeted the pretty girl's loss with some ribald jokes, that were
immediately drowned under a burst of public indignation. There was some
talk of instant execution—hanging the thief to the nearest
lamp-post,
and an investigation was begun, where everyone spoke at once and nobody
would listen to a word of reason. The tall <i>tricoteuse</i>,
pointing her
finger at an old man, strongly suspected of being an unfrocked monk,
swore it was the "Capuchin" yonder who was the cut-purse. The crowd
believed her without further evidence and raised a shout of "Death!
death!"</p>
			<p>The old man so unexpectedly exposed to the public vengeance
was standing
very quietly and soberly just in front of the <i>citoyen</i>
Brotteaux. He
had all the look, there was no denying it, of a <i>ci-devant</i>
cleric. His
aspect was venerable, though the face was changed and drawn by the
terrors the poor man had suffered from the violence of the crowd and
the
recollection of the September days that were still vivid in his
imagination. The fear depicted on his features stirred the suspicion of
the populace, which is always ready to believe that only the guilty
dread its judgments, as if the haste and recklessness with which it
pronounces them were not enough to terrify even the most innocent.</p>
			<p>Brotteaux had made it a standing rule never to go against the
popular
feeling of the moment, above all when it was manifestly illogical and
cruel, "because in that case," he would say, "the voice of the people
was the voice of God." But Brotteaux proved himself untrue to his
principles; he asseverated that the old man, whether he was a Capuchin
or not, could not have robbed the <i>citoyenne</i>, having
never gone near
her for one moment.</p>
			<p>The crowd drew its own conclusion,—the individual
who spoke up for the
thief was of course his accomplice, and stern measures were proposed to
deal with the two malefactors, and when Gamelin offered to guarantee
Brotteaux' honesty, the wisest heads suggested sending <i>him</i>
along with
the two others to the Sectional headquarters.</p>
			<p>But the pretty girl gave a cry of delight; she had found her
purse
again. The statement was received with a storm of hisses, and she was
threatened with a public whipping,—like a Nun.</p>
			<p>"Sir," said the ex-monk, addressing Brotteaux, "I thank you
for having
spoken in my defence. My name is of no concern, but I had better tell
you what it is; I am called Louis de Longuemare. I am in truth a
Regular; but not a Capuchin, as those women would have it. There is the
widest difference; I am a monk of the Order of the Barnabites, which
has
given Doctors and Saints without number to the Church. It is only a
half-truth to refer its origin to St. Charles Borromeo; we must account
as the true founder the Apostle St. Paul, whose cipher it bears on its
arms. I have been compelled to quit my cloister, now headquarters of
the
Section du Pont-Neuf, and adopt a secular habit.</p>
			<p>"Nay, Father," said Brotteaux, scrutinizing Monsieur de
Longuemare's
frock, "your dress is token enough that you have not forsworn your
profession; to look at it, one might think you had reformed your Order
rather than forsaken it. It is your good heart makes you expose
yourself
in these austere habiliments to the insults of a godless populace."</p>
			<p>"Yet I cannot very well," replied the ex-monk, "wear a blue
coat, like a
roisterer at a dance!"</p>
			<p>"What I mention, Father, about your dress is by way of paying
homage to
your character and putting you on your guard against the risks you run."</p>
			<p>"On the contrary, sir, it would be much better to inspirit me
to confess
my faith. For indeed, I am only too prone to fear danger. I have
abandoned my habit, sir, which is a sort of apostasy; I would fain not
have deserted, had it been possible, the House where God granted me for
so many years the grace of a peaceable and retired life. I got leave to
stay there, and I still continued to occupy my cell, while they turned
the church and cloister into a sort of petty <i>hôtel
de ville</i> they
called the Section. I saw, sir, I saw them hack away the emblems of the
Holy Verity; I saw the name of the Apostle Paul replaced by a convicted
felon's cap. Sometimes I was actually present at the confabulations of
the Section, where I heard amazing errors propounded. At last I quitted
this place of profanation and went to live on the pension of a hundred
pistoles allowed me by the Assembly in a stable that stood empty, the
horses having been requisitioned for the service of the armies. There I
sing Mass for a few of the faithful, who come to the office to bear
witness to the eternity of the Church of Jesus Christ."</p>
			<p>"For my part, Father," replied the other, "if you care to know
my name,
I am called Brotteaux, and I was a publican in former days."</p>
			<p>"Sir," returned the Père Longuemare, "I was aware
by St. Matthew's
example that one may look for good counsel from a publican."</p>
			<p>"Father, you are too obliging."</p>
			<p>"<i>Citoyen</i> Brotteaux," remarked Gamelin,
"pray admire the virtues of the
people, more hungry for justice than for bread; consider how everyone
here is ready to lose his place to chastise the thief. These men and
women, victims of such poverty and privation, are of so stern a probity
they cannot tolerate a dishonest act."</p>
			<p>"It must indeed be owned," replied Brotteaux, "that in their
hearty
desire to hang the pilferer, these folks were like to do a mischief to
this good cleric, to his champion and to his champion's champion. Their
avarice itself and their selfish eagerness to safeguard their own
welfare were motives enough; the thief in attacking one of them
threatened all; self-preservation urged them to punish him.... At the
same time, it is like enough the most part of these workmen and
goodwives are honest and keep their hands off other folk's goods. From
the cradle these sentiments have been instilled in them by their father
and mother, who have whipped them well and soundly and inculcated the
virtues through their backside."</p>
			<p>Gamelin did not conceal the fact from his old neighbour that
he deemed
such language unworthy of a philosopher.</p>
			<p>"Virtue," said he, "is natural to mankind; God has planted the
seed of
it in the heart of mortals."</p>
			<p>Old Brotteaux was a sceptic and found in his atheism an
abundant source
of self-satisfaction.</p>
			<p>"I see this much, <i>citoyen</i> Gamelin, that,
while a Revolutionary for
what is of this world, you are, where Heaven is concerned, of a
conservative, or even a reactionary temper. Robespierre and Marat are
the same to you. For me, I find it strange that Frenchmen, who will not
put up with a mortal king any longer, insist on retaining an immortal
tyrant, far more despotic and ferocious. For what is the Bastille, or
even the <i>Chambre Ardente</i> <a id="FNanchor_1_1" name="FNanchor_1_1"/><a class="fnanchor" href="#Footnote_1_1">[1]</a> beside Hellfire? Humanity
models its gods
on its tyrants, and you, who reject the original, preserve the copy!"</p>
			<p>"Oh! <i>citoyen!</i>" protested Gamelin, "are you
not ashamed to hold such
language? how can you confound the dark divinities born of ignorance
and
fear with the Author of Nature? Belief in a benevolent God is necessary
for morality. The Supreme Being is the source of all the virtues and a
man cannot be a Republican if he does not believe in God. Robespierre
knew this, who, as we all remember, had the bust of the philosopher
Helvétius removed from the Hall of the Jacobins, because he
had taught
Frenchmen the lessons of slavery by preaching atheism.... I hope, at
least, <i>citoyen</i> Brotteaux, that, as soon as the
Republic has
established the worship of Reason, you will not refuse your adhesion to
so wise a religion!"</p>
			<p>"I love reason, but I am no fanatic in my love," was
Brotteaux's answer.
"Reason is our guide and beacon-light; but when you have made a
divinity
of it, it will blind you and instigate you to crime,"—and he
proceeded
to develop his thesis, standing both feet in the kennel, as he had once
been used to perorate, seated in one of Baron d'Holbach's gilt
armchairs, which, as he was fond of saying, formed the basis of natural
philosophy.</p>
			<p>"Jean Jacques Rousseau," he proceeded, "who was not without
talents,
particularly in music, was a scampish fellow who professed to derive
his
morality from Nature while all the time he got it from the dogmas of
Calvin. Nature teaches us to devour each other and gives us the example
of all the crimes and all the vices which the social state corrects or
conceals. We should love virtue; but it is well to know that this is
simply and solely a convenient expedient invented by men in order to
live comfortably together. What we call morality is merely a desperate
enterprise, a forlorn hope, on the part of our fellow creatures to
reverse the order of the universe, which is strife and murder, the
blind
interplay of hostile forces. She destroys herself, and the more I think
of things, the more convinced I am that the universe is mad.
Theologians
and philosophers, who make God the author of Nature and the architect
of
the universe, show Him to us as illogical and ill-conditioned. They
declare Him benevolent, because they are afraid of Him, but they are
forced to admit that His acts are atrocious. They attribute a malignity
to him seldom to be found even in mankind. And that is how they get
human beings to adore Him. For our miserable race would never lavish
worship on just and benevolent deities from which they would have
nothing to fear; they would feel only a barren gratitude for their
benefits. Without purgatory and hell, your good God would be a mighty
poor creature."</p>
			<p>"Sir," said the Père Longuemare, "do not talk of
Nature; you do not know
what Nature is."</p>
			<p>"Egad, I know it as well as you do, Father."</p>
			<p>"You cannot know it, because you have not religion, and
religion alone
teaches us what Nature is, wherein it is good, and how it has been made
evil. However, you must not expect me to answer you; God has vouchsafed
me, to refute your errors, neither eloquence nor force of intellect. I
should only be afraid, by my inadequate replies, of giving you occasion
to blaspheme and further reasons for hardening your heart. I feel a
strong desire to help you; yet the sole fruit of my importunate efforts
would be to...."</p>
			<p>The discussion was cut short by a tremendous shout coming from
the head
of the column to warn the whole regiment of famished citizens that the
baker was opening his doors. The line began to push forward, but very,
very slowly. A National Guard on duty admitted the purchasers one by
one. The baker, his wife and boy presided over the sale, assisted by
two
Civil Commissaries. These, wearing a tricoloured riband round the left
arm, saw that the customers belonged to the Section and were given
their
proper share in proportion to the number of mouths to be filled.</p>
			<p>The <i>citoyen</i> Brotteaux made the quest of
pleasure the one and only aim
of life, holding that the reason and the senses, the sole judges when
gods there were none, were unable to conceive any other. Accordingly,
finding the painter's remarks somewhat overfull of fanaticism, and the
Monk's of simplicity, to please his taste, this wise man, bent on
squaring his behaviour with his views and relieving the tedium of
waiting, drew from the bulging pocket of his plum-coloured coat his
Lucretius, now as always his chiefest solace and faithful comforter.
The
binding of red morocco was chafed by hard wear, and the <i>citoyen</i>
Brotteaux had judiciously erased the coat of arms that once embellished
it,—three islets or, which his father the financier had
bought for
good money down. He opened the book at the passage where the poet
philosopher, who is for curing men of the futile and mischievous
passion
of love, surprises a woman in the arms of her serving-women in a state
bound to offend all a lover's susceptibilities. The <i>citoyen</i>
Brotteaux
read the lines, though not without casting a surreptitious glance at
the
golden pate of the pretty girl in front of him and enjoying a sniff of
the heady perfume of the little slut's hot skin. The poet Lucretius was
a wise man, but he had only one string to his bow; his disciple
Brotteaux had several.</p>
			<p>So he read on, taking two steps forward every quarter of an
hour. His
ear, soothed by the grave and cadenced numbers of the Latin Muse, was
deaf to the women's scolding about the monstrous prices of bread and
sugar and coffee, candles and soap. In this calm and unruffled mood he
reached the threshold of the bakehouse. Behind him, Évariste
Gamelin
could see over his head the gilt cornsheaf surmounting the iron grating
that filled the fanlight over the door.</p>
			<p>When his turn came to enter the shop, he found the hampers and
lockers
already emptied; the baker handed him the only scrap of bread left,
which did not weigh two pounds. Évariste paid his money, and
the gate
was slammed on his heels, for fear of a riot and the people carrying
the
place by storm.</p>
			<p>But there was no need to fear; these poor folks, trained to
obedience
alike by their old-time oppressors and by their liberators of to-day,
slunk off with drooping heads and dragging feet.</p>
			<p>As he reached the corner of the street, Gamelin caught sight
of the
<i>citoyenne</i> Dumonteil, seated on a stone post, her
nursling in her
arms. She sat there quite still; her face was colourless and her
tearless eyes seemed to see nothing. The infant was sucking her finger
voraciously. Gamelin stood a while in front of her, abashed and
uncertain what to do. She did not appear to see him.</p>
			<p>He stammered something, then pulled out his pocket-knife, a
clasp-knife
with a horn handle, cut his loaf in two and laid half on the young
mother's knee. She looked up at him in wonder; but he had already
turned
the corner of the street.</p>
			<p>On reaching home, Évariste found his mother sitting
at the window
darning stockings. With a light laugh he put his half of the bread in
her hand.</p>
			<p>"You must forgive me, mother dear; I was tired out with
standing about
and exhausted by the heat, and out in the street there as I trudged
home, mouthful by mouthful I have gobbled up half of our allowance.
There's barely your share left,"—and as he spoke, he made a
pretence of
shaking the crumbs off his jacket.</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_1" name="Footnote_1_1"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a><i>Chambre Ardente</i>,—under the ancien
régime, a tribunal
charged with the investigation of heinous crimes and having power to
burn those found guilty.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
