<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>By
nine in the morning Évariste reached the gardens
of the Luxembourg,
to find Élodie already there seated on a bench waiting for
him.</p>
			<p>It was a month ago they had exchanged their vows and since
then they had
seen each other every day, either at the <i>Amour peintre</i>
or at the
studio in the Place de Thionville. Their meetings had been very tender,
but at the same time characterized by a certain reserve that checked
their expansiveness,—a reserve due to the staid and virtuous
temper of
the lover, a theist and a good citizen, who, while ready to make his
beloved mistress his own before the law or with God alone for witness
according as circumstances demanded, would do nothing save publicly and
in the light of day. Élodie knew the resolution to be right
and
honourable; but, despairing of a marriage that seemed impossible from
every point of view and loath to outrage the prejudices of society, she
contemplated in her inmost heart a liaison that could be kept a secret
till the lapse of time gave it sanction. She hoped one day to overcome
the scruples of a lover she could have wished less scrupulous, and
meantime, unwilling to postpone some necessary confidences as to the
past, she had asked him to meet her for a lover's talk in a lonely
corner of the gardens near the Carthusian Priory.</p>
			<p>She threw him a tender look, took his hand frankly, invited
him to share
the bench and speaking slowly and thoughtfully:</p>
			<p>"I esteem you too well, Évariste, to hide anything
from you. I believe
myself worthy of you; I should not be so were I not to tell you
everything. Hear me and be my judge. I have no act to reproach myself
with that is degrading or base, or even merely selfish. I have only
been
weak and credulous.... Do not forget, dear Évariste, the
difficult
circumstances in which I found myself. You know how it was with me; I
had lost my mother, my father, still a young man, thought only of his
own amusement and neglected me. I had a feeling heart, nature has
dowered me with a loving temper and a generous soul; it was true she
had
not denied me a firm will and a sound judgment, but in those days what
ruled my conduct was passion, not reason. Alas! it would be the same
again to-day, if the two were not in harmony; I should be driven to
give
myself to you, beloved, heart and soul, and for ever!"</p>
			<p>She expressed herself in firm, well-balanced phrases. She had
well
thought over what she would say, having long ago made up her mind to
this confession for several reasons—because she was naturally
candid,
because she found pleasure in following Rousseau's example, and
because,
as she told herself reasonably enough:</p>
			<p>"One day Évariste must fathom a secret which is
known to others as well
as myself. A frank avowal is best. It is unforced and therefore to my
credit, and only tells him what some time or other he would discover to
my shame."</p>
			<p>Soft-hearted as she was and amenable to nature's promptings,
she did
not feel herself to be very much to blame, and this made her confession
the easier; besides which, she had no intention of telling more than
was
absolutely requisite.</p>
			<p>"Ah!" she sighed, "why did I not know you,
Évariste, in the days when I
was alone and forsaken?"</p>
			<p>Gamelin had taken her request quite literally when
Élodie asked him to
be her judge. Primed at once by nature and the education of books for
the exercise of domestic justice, he sat ready to receive
Élodie's
admissions.</p>
			<p>As she still hesitated, he motioned to her to proceed. Then
she began
speaking very simply:</p>
			<p>"A young man, who with many defects of character combined some
good
qualities, and only showed the latter, found me to his taste and
courted
me with a perseverance that was surprising in such a case; he was in
the
flower of his youth, full of charm and the idol of a bevy of charming
women who made no attempt to hide their adoration. It was not his good
looks nor even his brilliance that appealed to me.... He touched my
heart by the tokens of true love he gave me, and I do think he loved me
truly. He was tender, impassioned. I asked no pledge save of his heart,
and alas! his heart was fickle.... I blame no one but myself; it is my
confession I am making, not his. I lay nothing to his charge, for
indeed
he is become a stranger to me. Ah! believe me, Évariste, I
swear it, he
is no more to me than if he had never existed."</p>
			<p>She had finished, but Gamelin vouchsafed no answer. He folded
his arms,
a steadfast, sombre look settling in his eyes. His mistress and his
sister Julie were running together in his thoughts. Julie too had
hearkened to a lover; but, unlike, altogether unlike, he thought, the
unhappy Élodie, <i>she</i> had let him have his
will and carry her off, not
misled by the promptings of a tender heart, but to enjoy, far from her
home and friends, the sweets of luxury and pleasure. He was a stern
moralist; he had condemned his sister and he was half inclined to
condemn his mistress.</p>
			<p>Élodie resumed in a very pleading voice:</p>
			<p>"I was full of Jean-Jacques' philosophy; I believed men were
naturally
honest and honourable. My misfortune was to have encountered a lover
who
was not formed in the school of nature and natural morality, and whom
social prejudice, ambition, self-love, a false point of honour had made
selfish and treacherous."</p>
			<p>The words produced the effect she had calculated on. Gamelin's
eyes
softened. He asked:</p>
			<p>"Who was your seducer? Is he a man I know?"</p>
			<p>"You do not know him."</p>
			<p>"Tell me his name."</p>
			<p>She had foreseen the question and was firmly resolved not to
answer it.</p>
			<p>She gave her reasons:</p>
			<p>"Spare me, I beseech you. For your peace of mind as for my
own, I have
already said too much."</p>
			<p>Then, as he still pressed her:</p>
			<p>"In the sacred name of our love, I refuse to tell you anything
to give
you a definite notion of this stranger. I will not give your jealousy a
shape to feed on; I will not bring a harassing shadow between you and
me. I have not forgotten the man's name, but I will never let you know
it."</p>
			<p>Gamelin insisted on knowing the name of the
seducer,—that was the word
he employed all through, for he felt no doubt Élodie had
been seduced,
cajoled, trifled with. He could not so much as conceive any other
possibility,—that she had obeyed an overmastering desire, an
irresistible craving, listened to the tempter's voice in the shape of
her own flesh and blood; he could not find it credible that the fair
victim, a creature of hot passion and a fond heart, had offered herself
a willing sacrifice; to satisfy his ideal, she must needs have been
overborne by force or fraud, constrained by sheer violence, caught in
snares spread about her steps on every side. He questioned her in
guarded terms, but with a close, searching, embarrassing persistency.
He
asked her how the liaison began, if it was long or short, tranquil or
troubled, under what circumstances it was broken off. And his enquiries
came back again and again to the means the fellow had used to cajole
her, as if these must surely have been extraordinary and unheard of.
But
all his cross-examination was in vain. She kept her own counsel with a
gentle, deprecatory obstinacy, her lips tightly pressed together and
tears welling in her eyes.</p>
			<p>Presently, however, Évariste having asked where the
man was now, she
told him:</p>
			<p>"He has left the Kingdom—France, I mean," she
corrected herself in an
instant.</p>
			<p>"An <i>émigré</i>!"
ejaculated Gamelin.</p>
			<p>She looked at him, speechless, at once reassured and
disheartened to see
him create in his own mind a truth in accordance with his political
passions and of his own motion give his jealousy a Jacobin complexion.</p>
			<p>In actual fact Élodie's lover was a little lawyer's
clerk, a very pretty
lad, half Adonis, half guttersnipe, whom she had adored and the thought
of whom, though three years had gone by since, still thrilled her
nerves. Rich old women were his particular game, and he deserted
Élodie
for a woman of the world of a certain age who could and did recompense
his merits. Having, after the abolition of offices, attained a post in
the Mairie of Paris, he was now a <i>sansculotte</i>
dragoon and the
hanger-on of a <i>ci-devant</i> Countess.</p>
			<p>"A noble! an <i>émigré</i>!"
muttered Gamelin, whom she took good care not to
undeceive, never having been desirous he should know the whole truth.
"And he deserted you like a dastard?"</p>
			<p>She nodded in answer. He clasped her to his heart:</p>
			<p>"Dear victim of the vile corruption of monarchies, my love
shall avenge
his villainy! Heaven grant, I may meet the scoundrel! I shall not fail
to know him!"</p>
			<p>She turned away, at one and the same time saddened and
smiling,—and
disappointed. She would fain have had him wiser in the lore of love,
with more of the natural man about him, more perhaps even of the brute.
She felt he forgave so readily only because his imagination was cold
and
the secret she had revealed awoke in him none of the mental pictures
that torture sensuous natures,—in a word, that he saw her
seduction
solely under a moral and social aspect.</p>
			<p>They had risen, and while they walked up and down the shady
avenues of
the gardens, he informed her that he only esteemed her the more because
she had suffered wrong, Élodie entertained no such high
claims; however,
take him as he was, she loved him, and admired the brilliant artistic
genius she divined in him.</p>
			<p>As they left the Luxembourg, they came upon crowds thronging
the Rue de
l'Égalité and the whole neighbourhood of the
Théâtre de la Nation. There
was nothing to surprise them in this; for several days great excitement
had prevailed in the most patriotic Sections; denunciations were rife
against the Orleans faction and the Brissotin plotters, who were
conspiring, it was said, to bring about the ruin of Paris and the
massacre of good Republicans. Gamelin himself a short time back had
signed a petition from the Commune demanding the expulsion of the
Twenty-one.</p>
			<p>Just before passing under the arcade, joining the theatre to
the
neighbouring house, they had to find their way through a group of
citizens <i>en carmagnole</i> who were listening to a
harangue from a young
soldier mounted on the top of the gallery. He looked as beautiful as
the
Eros of Praxiteles in his helmet of panther-skin. This fascinating
warrior was charging the People's Friend with indolence:</p>
			<p>"Marat, you are asleep," he was crying, "and the federalists
are forging
fetters to bind us."</p>
			<p>Hardly had Élodie cast eyes on the orator before
she turned rapidly to
Évariste and begged him to get her away. The crowd, she
declared,
frightened her and she was afraid of fainting in the crush.</p>
			<p>They parted in the Place de la Nation, swearing an oath of
eternal
fidelity.</p>
			<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
			<p>That same morning early the <i>citoyen</i>
Brotteaux had made the <i>citoyenne</i>
Gamelin the magnificent present of a capon. It would have been an act
of
indiscretion for him to mention how he had come by it; as a fact, he
had
it of a <i>Dame de la Halle</i> at the Pointe Eustache for
whom he sometimes
acted as amanuensis, and as everybody knows, these "Ladies of the
Market" cherished Royalist sympathies and were in correspondence with
the <i>émigrés</i>. The <i>citoyenne</i>
Gamelin had received the gift with
heartfelt gratitude. Such dainties were scarce ever seen then; victuals
grew dearer every day. The people feared a famine; the aristocrats,
they
said, wished it, and the "corner" makers were at work to bring it about.</p>
			<p>The <i>citoyen</i> Brotteaux, being invited to
eat his share of the capon at
the midday dinner, appeared in due course and congratulated his hostess
on the rich aroma of cooking that assailed his nostrils. Indeed a noble
smell of rich, savoury broth filled the painter's studio.</p>
			<p>"You are very obliging, sir," replied the good dame. "To
prepare the
digestion for your capon, I have made a vegetable soup with a slice of
fat bacon and a big beef bone. There's nothing like a marrowbone, sir,
to give soup a flavour."</p>
			<p>"The maxim does you honour, <i>citoyenne</i>,"
returned the old man. "And you
will be doing wisely to put back again to-morrow and the day after, all
the week, in fact, to put back again, I say, this precious bone in the
pot, which it will continue to flavour. The wise woman of Panzoust
always did so; she used to make a soup of green cabbages with a rind of
rusty bacon and an old <i>savorados</i>. That is what in
her country, which
is also mine, they call the medullary bone, the most tasty and most
succulent of all bones."</p>
			<p>"This lady you speak of, sir," remarked the <i>citoyenne</i>
Gamelin, "was
she not rather a saving soul, to make the same bone serve so many times
over?"</p>
			<p>"Oh! she lived in a small way," explained Brotteaux, "she was
poor,
albeit a prophetess."</p>
			<p>At that moment, Évariste Gamelin returned, agitated
by the confession he
had heard and determined to know who was Élodie's betrayer,
to avenge at
one and the same time the Republic's wrong and his own on the miscreant.</p>
			<p>After the usual greetings had been exchanged, the <i>citoyen</i>
Brotteaux
resumed the thread of his discourse:</p>
			<p>"It is seldom those who make a trade of foretelling the future
grow
rich. Their impostures are too soon found out and their trickery
renders
them odious. But indeed we should be bound to detest them much worse if
they prophesied truly. A man's life would be intolerable if he knew
what
is to befall him. He would be aware of calamities to come and suffer
their pains in advance, while he would get no joy of present blessings
whose end he would foresee. Ignorance is a necessary condition of human
happiness, and it must be owned that in most cases we fulfil it well.
We
know almost nothing about ourselves; absolutely nothing about our
neighbours. Ignorance constitutes our peace of mind; self-deception our
felicity."</p>
			<p>The <i>citoyenne</i> Gamelin set the soup on the
table, said the Benedicite
and seated her son and her guest at the board. She stood up herself to
eat, declining the chair the <i>citoyen</i> Brotteaux
offered her beside him;
she said she knew what good manners required of a woman.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
