<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>On the afternoon of the same day Évariste set out to see the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Jean Blaise, printseller, as well as dealer in ornamental boxes, fancy goods and games of all sorts, in the Rue Honoré, opposite the Oratoire and near the office of the Messageries, at the sign of the Amour peintre. The shop was on the ground floor of a house sixty years old, and opened on the street by a vaulted arch the keystone of which bore a grotesque head with horns. The semicircle beneath the arch was occupied by an oil-painting representing “the Sicilian or Cupid the Painter,” after a composition by Boucher, which Jean Blaise’s father had put up in 1770 and which sun and rain had been doing their best to obliterate ever since. On either side of the door a similar arched opening, with a nymph’s head on the keystone arch glazed with the largest panes to be got, exhibited for the benefit of the public the prints in vogue at the time and the latest novelties in coloured engravings. Today’s display included a series of scenes of gallantry by Boilly, treated in his graceful, rather stiff way, <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">Leçons d’amour conjugal</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">Douces résistances</i> and the like, which scandalized the Jacobins and which the rigid moralists denounced to the Society of Arts, Debucourt’s <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">Promenade publique</i>, with a dandy in canary-coloured breeches lounging on three chairs, a group of horses by the young Carle Vernet, pictures of air balloons, the <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">Bain de Virginie</i> and figures after the antique.</p>
			<p>Amid the stream of citizens that flowed past the shop it was the raggedest figures that loitered longest before the two fascinating windows. Easily amused, delighting in pictures and bent on getting their share, if only through the eyes, of the good things of this world, they stood in open-mouthed admiration, whereas the aristocrats merely glanced in, frowned and passed on.</p>
			<p>The instant he came within sight of the house, Évariste fixed his eyes on one of the row of windows above the shop, the one on the left hand, where there was a red carnation in a flowerpot behind a balcony of twisted ironwork. It was the window of Élodie’s chamber, Jean Blaise’s daughter. The print-dealer lived with his only child on the first floor of the house.</p>
			<p>Évariste, after halting a moment as if to get his breath in front of the Amour peintre, turned the hasp of the shop-door. He found the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Élodie within; she had just sold a couple of engravings by Fragonard fils and Naigeon, carefully selected from a number of others, and before locking up the assignats received in payment in the strongbox, was holding them one after the other between her fine eyes and the light, to scrutinize the delicate lines and intricate curves of engraving and the watermark. She was naturally suspicious, for as much forged paper was in circulation as true, which was a great hindrance to commerce. As in former days, in the case of such as copied the King’s signature, forgers of the national currency were punished by death; yet plates for printing assignats were to be found in every cellar, the Swiss smuggled in counterfeits by the million, whole packets were put in circulation in the inns, the English landed bales of them every day on our coasts, to ruin the Republic’s credit and bring good patriots to destitution. Élodie was in terror of accepting bad paper, and still more in terror of passing it and being treated as an accomplice of Pitt, though she had a firm belief in her own good luck and felt pretty sure of coming off best in any emergency.</p>
			<p>Évariste looked at her with the sombre gaze that speaks more movingly of love than the most smiling face. She returned his gaze with a mocking curl of the lips and an arch gleam in the dark eyes⁠—an expression she wore because she knew he loved her and liked to know it and because such a look provokes a lover, makes him complain of ill-usage, brings him to the speaking point, if he has not spoken already, which was Évariste’s case.</p>
			<p>Before depositing the assignats in the strongbox, she produced from her workbasket a white scarf, which she had begun to embroider, and set to work on it. At once industrious and a coquette, she knew instinctively how to ply her needle so as to fascinate an admirer and make a pretty thing for her wearing at one and the same time; she had quite different ways of working according to the person watching her⁠—a nonchalant way for those she would lull into a gentle languor, a capricious way for those she was fain to see in a more or less despairing mood. For Évariste, she bent with an air of painstaking absorption over her scarf, for she wanted to stir a sentiment of serious affection in his heart.</p>
			<p>Élodie was neither very young nor very pretty. She might have been deemed plain at the first glance. She was a brunette, with an olive complexion; under the broad white kerchief knotted carelessly about her head, from which the dark lustrous ringlets escaped, her eyes of fire gleamed as if they would burn their orbits. Her round face with its prominent cheekbones, laughing lips and rather broad nose, that gave it a wild-wood, voluptuous expression, reminded the painter of the faun of the Borghese, a cast of which he had seen and been struck with admiration for its freakish charm. A faint down of moustache accentuated the curve of the full lips. A bosom that seemed big with love was confined by a crossed kerchief in the fashion of the year. Her supple waist, her active limbs, her whole vigorous body expressed in every movement a wild, delicious freedom. Every glance, every breath, every quiver of the warm flesh called for love and promised passion. There, behind the tradesman’s counter, she seemed rather a dancing nymph, a bacchante of the opera, stripped of her lynx skin and thyrsus, imprisoned, and travestied by a magician’s spell under the modest trappings of a housewife by Chardin.</p>
			<p>“My father is not at home,” she told the painter; “wait a little, he will not be long.”</p>
			<p>In the small brown hands the needle travelled swiftly over the fine lawn.</p>
			<p>“Is the pattern to your taste, Monsieur Gamelin?”</p>
			<p>It was not in Gamelin’s nature to pretend. And love, exaggerating his confidence, encouraged him to speak quite frankly.</p>
			<p>“You embroider cleverly, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span>; but, if I am to say what I think, the pattern you have traced is not simple enough or bold enough, and smacks of the affected taste that in France governed too long the ornamentation of dress and furniture and woodwork; all those rosettes and wreaths recall the pretty, finikin style that was in favour under the tyrant. There is a new birth of taste. Alas! we have much leeway to make up. In the days of the infamous Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> the art of decoration had something Chinese about it. They made potbellied cabinets with drawer handles grotesque in their contortions, good for nothing but to be thrown on the fire to warm good patriots. Simplicity alone is beautiful. We must hark back to the antique. David designs beds and chairs from the Etruscan vases and the wall-paintings of Herculaneum.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I have seen those beds and chairs,” said Élodie, “they are lovely. Soon we shall want no other sort. I am like you, I adore the antique.”</p>
			<p>“Well, then, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span>,” returned Évariste, “if you had limited your pattern to a Greek border, with ivy leaves, serpents or crossed arrows, it would have been worthy of a Spartan maiden … and of you. But you can still keep this design by simplifying it, reducing it to the plain lines of beauty.”</p>
			<p>She asked her preceptor what should be picked out.</p>
			<p>He bent over the work, and the girl’s ringlets swept lightly over his cheek. Their hands met and their breaths mingled. For an instant Évariste tasted an ecstatic bliss, but to feel Élodie’s lips so close to his own filled him with fear, and dreading to alarm her modesty, he drew back quickly.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Blaise was in love with Évariste Gamelin; she thought his great ardent eyes superb no less than the fine oval of his pale face, and his abundant black locks, parted above the brow and falling in showers about his shoulders; his gravity of demeanour, his cold reserve, his severe manner and uncompromising speech which never condescended to flattery, were equally to her liking. She was in love, and therefore believed him possessed of supreme artistic genius that would one day blossom forth in incomparable masterpieces and make his name world-famous⁠—and she loved him the better for the belief. The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Blaise was no prude on the score of masculine purity and her scruples were not offended because a man should satisfy his passions and follow his own tastes and caprices; she loved Évariste, who was virtuous; she did not love him because he was virtuous, albeit she appreciated the advantage of his being so in that she had no cause for jealousy or suspicion or any fear of rivals in his affections.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, for the time being, she deemed his reserve a little overdone. If Racine’s “Aricie,” who loved “Hippolyte,” admired the youthful hero’s untameable virtue, it was with the hope of winning a victory over it, and she would quickly have bewailed a sternness of moral fibre that had refused to be softened for her sake. At the first opportunity she more than half declared her passion to constrain him to speak out himself. Like her prototype the tenderhearted “Aricie,” the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Blaise was much inclined to think that in love the woman is bound to make the advances. “The fondest hearts,” she told herself, “are the most fearful; they need help and encouragement. Besides, they are so simple a woman can go half way and even further without their even knowing it, if only she lets them fancy the credit is theirs of the bold attack and the glorious victory.” What made her more confident of success was the fact that she knew for a certainty (and indeed there was no doubt about it) that Évariste, before ever the Revolution had made him a hero, had loved a mistress like any ordinary mortal, a very unheroic creature, no other than the concierge at the Academy of Painting. Élodie, who was a girl of some experience, quite realised that there are different sorts of love. The sentiment Évariste inspired in her heart was profound enough for her to dream of making him the partner of her life. She was very ready to marry him, but hardly expected her father would approve the union of his only daughter with a poor and unknown artist. Gamelin had nothing, while the printseller turned over large sums of money. The Amour peintre brought him in large profits, the share market larger still, and he was in partnership with an army contractor who supplied the cavalry of the Republic with rushes in place of hay and mildewed oats. In a word, the cutler’s son of the Rue Saint-Dominique was a very insignificant personage beside the publisher of engravings, a man known throughout Europe, related to the Blaizots, Basans and Didots, and an honoured guest at the houses of the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyens</span> Saint-Pierre and Florian. Not that, as an obedient daughter should, she held her father’s consent to be an indispensable preliminary to her settlement in life. The latter, early left a widower, and a man of a self-indulgent, volatile temper, as enterprising with women as he was in business, had never paid much heed to her and had left her to develop at her own sweet will, untrammelled whether by parental advice or parental affection, more careful to ignore than to safeguard the girl’s behaviour, whose passionate temperament he appreciated as a connoisseur of the sex and in whom he recognized charms far and away more seductive than a pretty face. Too generous-hearted to be circumspect, too clever to come to harm, cautious even in her caprices, passion had never made her forget the social proprieties. Her father was infinitely grateful for this prudent behaviour, and as she had inherited from him a good head for business and a taste for moneymaking, he never troubled himself as to the mysterious reasons that deterred a girl so eminently marriageable from entering that estate and kept her at home, where she was as good as a housekeeper and four clerks to him. At twenty-seven she felt old enough and experienced enough to manage her own concerns and had no need to ask the advice or consult the wishes of a father still a young man, and one of so easygoing and careless a temper. But for her to marry Gamelin, Monsieur Blaise must needs contrive a future for a son-in-law with such poor prospects, give him an interest in the business, guarantee him regular work as he did to several artists already⁠—in fact, one way or another, provide him with a livelihood; and such a favour was out of the question, she considered, whether for the one to offer or the other to accept, so small was the bond of sympathy between the two men.</p>
			<p>The difficulty troubled the girl’s tender heart and wise brain. She saw nothing to alarm her in a secret union with her lover and in taking the author of nature for sole witness of their mutual troth. Her creed found nothing blameworthy in such a union, which the independence of her mode of life made possible and which Évariste’s honourable and virtuous character gave her good hopes of forming without apprehension as to the result. But Gamelin was hard put to it to live and provide his old mother with the barest necessaries, and it did not seem as though in so straitened an existence room could well be found for an amour even when reduced to the simplicity of nature. Moreover, Évariste had not yet spoken and declared his intentions, though certainly the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span> Blaise hoped to bring him to this before long.</p>
			<p>She broke off her meditations, and the needle stopped at the same moment.</p>
			<p>“<span xml:lang="fr">Citoyen</span> Évariste,” she said, “I shall not care for the scarf, unless you like it too. Draw me a pattern, please. Meanwhile, I will copy Penelope and unravel what I have done in your absence.”</p>
			<p>He answered in a tone of sombre enthusiasm:</p>
			<p>“I promise you I will, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span>. I will draw you the brand of the tyrannicide Harmodius⁠—a sword in a wreath,”⁠—and pulling out his pencil, he sketched in a design of swords and flowers in the sober, unadorned style he admired. And as he drew, he expounded his views of art:</p>
			<p>“A regenerated People,” he declared, “must repudiate all the legacies of servitude, bad taste, bad outline, bad drawing. Watteau, Boucher, Fragonard worked for tyrants and for slaves. Their works show no feeling for good style or purity of line, no love of nature or truth. Masks, dolls, fripperies, monkey-tricks⁠—nothing else! Posterity will despise their frivolous productions. In a hundred years all Watteau’s pictures will be banished to the garrets and falling to pieces from neglect; in 1893 struggling painters will be daubing their studies over Boucher’s canvases. David has opened the way; he approaches the Antique, but he has not yet reached true simplicity, true grandeur, bare and unadorned. Our artists have many secrets still to learn from the friezes of Herculaneum, the Roman bas-reliefs, the Etruscan vases.”</p>
			<p>He dilated at length on antique beauty, then came back to Fragonard, whom he abused with inexhaustible venom:</p>
			<p>“Do you know him, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyenne</span>?”</p>
			<p>Élodie nodded.</p>
			<p>“You likewise know good old Greuze, who is ridiculous enough, to be sure, with his scarlet coat and his sword. But he looks like a wise man of Greece beside Fragonard. I met him, a while ago, the miserable old man, trotting by under the arcades of the Palais-Égalité, powdered, genteel, sprightly, spruce, hideous. At sight of him, I longed that, failing Apollo, some sturdy friend of the arts might hang him up to a tree and flay him alive like Marsyas as an everlasting warning to bad painters.”</p>
			<p>Élodie gave him a long look out of her dancing, wanton eyes.</p>
			<p>“You know how to hate, Monsieur Gamelin, are we to conclude you know also how to lo … ?”</p>
			<p>“Is that you, Gamelin?” broke in a tenor voice; it was the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise just come back to his shop. He advanced, boots creaking, charms rattling, coat-skirts flying, an enormous black cocked hat on his head, the corners of which touched his shoulders.</p>
			<p>Élodie, picking up her workbasket, retreated to her chamber.</p>
			<p>“Well, Gamelin!” inquired the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise, “have you brought me anything new?”</p>
			<p>“May be,” declared the painter⁠—and proceeded to expound his ideas.</p>
			<p>“Our playing cards present a grievous and startling contrast with our present ways of thinking. The names of knave and king offend the ears of a patriot. I have designed and executed a reformed, Revolutionary pack in which for kings, queens, and knaves are substituted Liberties, Equalities, Fraternities; the aces in a border of fasces, are called Laws. … You call Liberty of clubs, Equality of spades, Fraternity of diamonds, Law of hearts. I venture to think my cards are drawn with some spirit; I propose to have them engraved on copper by Desmahis, and to take out letters of patent.”</p>
			<p>So saying and extracting from his portfolio some finished designs in watercolour, the artist handed them to the printseller.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise declined to take them, and turning away:</p>
			<p>“My lad,” he sneered, “take ’em to the Convention; they will perhaps accord you a vote of thanks. But never think to make a sol by your new invention which is not new at all. You’re a day behind the fair. Your Revolutionary pack of cards is the third I’ve had brought me. Your comrade Dugourc offered me last week a picquet set with four Geniuses of the People, four Liberties, four Equalities. Another was suggested, with Sages and Heroes, Cato, Rousseau, Hannibal⁠—I don’t know what all! … And these cards had the advantage over yours, my friend, in being coarsely drawn and cut on wood blocks⁠—with a penknife. How little you know the world to dream that players will use cards designed in the taste of David and engraved à la Bartolozzi! And then again, what a strange mistake to think it needs all this to-do to suit the old packs to the new ideas. Out of their own heads, the good sansculottes can find a corrective for what offends them, saying, instead of ‘king’⁠—‘The Tyrant!’ or just ‘The fat pig!’ They go on using the same old filthy cards and never buy new ones. The great market for playing-cards is the gaming-hells of the Palais-Égalité; well, I advise you to go there and offer the croupiers and punters there your Liberties, your Equalities, your … what d’ye call ’em? … Laws of hearts … and come back and tell me what sort of a reception they gave you!”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise sat down on the counter, filliped away sundry grains of snuff from his nankeen breeches and looking at Gamelin with an air of gentle pity:</p>
			<p>“Let me give you a bit of advice, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span>; if you want to make your living, drop your patriotic packs of cards, leave your revolutionary symbols alone, have done with your Hercules, your hydras, your Furies pursuing guilt, your Geniuses of Liberty, and paint me pretty girls. The people’s ardour for regeneration grows lukewarm with time, but men will always love women. Paint me women, all pink and white, with little feet and tiny hands. And get this into your thick skull that nobody cares a fig about the Revolution or wants to hear another word about it.”</p>
			<p>But Évariste drew himself up in indignant protest:</p>
			<p>“What! not hear another word of the Revolution! … But, why surely, the restoration of liberty, the victories of our armies, the chastisement of tyrants are events that will startle the most remote posterity. How could we not be struck by such portents? … What! the sect of the sansculotte Jesus has lasted well-nigh eighteen centuries, and the religion of Liberty is to be abolished after barely four years of existence!”</p>
			<p>But Jean Blaise resumed in a tone of superiority:</p>
			<p>“You walk in a dream; <em>I</em> see life as it is. Believe me, friend, the Revolution is a bore; it lasts over long. Five years of enthusiasm, five years of fraternal embraces, of massacres, of fine speeches, of “Marseillaises,” of tocsins, of ‘hang up the aristocrats,’ of heads promenaded on pikes, of women mounted astride of cannon, of trees of Liberty crowned with the red cap, of white-robed maidens and old men drawn about the streets in flower-wreathed cars; of imprisonments and guillotinings, of proclamations, and short commons, of cockades and plumes, swords and carmagnoles⁠—it grows tedious! And then folk are beginning to lose the hang of it all. We have gone through too much, we have seen too many of the great men and noble patriots whom you have led in triumph to the Capitol only to hurl them afterwards from the Tarpeian rock⁠—Necker, Mirabeau, La Fayette, Bailly, Pétion, Manuel, and how many others! How can we be sure you are not preparing the same fate for your new heroes? … Men have lost all count.”</p>
			<p>“Their names, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise; name them, these heroes we are making ready to sacrifice!” cried Gamelin in a tone that recalled the print-dealer to a sense of prudence.</p>
			<p>“I am a Republican and a patriot,” he replied, clapping his hand on his heart. “I am as good a Republican as you, as ardent a patriot as you, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Gamelin. I do not suspect your zeal nor accuse you of any backsliding. But remember that my zeal and my devotion to the State are attested by numerous acts. Here you have my principles: I give my confidence to every individual competent to serve the Nation. Before the men whom the general voice elects to the perilous honour of the Legislative office, such as Marat, such as Robespierre, I bow my head; I am ready to support them to the measure of my poor ability and offer them the humble cooperation of a good citizen. The Committees can bear witness to my ardour and self-sacrifice. In conjunction with true patriots, I have furnished oats and fodder to our gallant cavalry, boots for our soldiers. This very day I am despatching from Vernon a convoy of sixty oxen to the Army of the South through a country infested with brigands and patrolled by the emissaries of Pitt and Condé. I do not talk; I act.”</p>
			<p>Gamelin calmly put back his sketches in his portfolio, the strings of which he tied and then slipped it under his arm.</p>
			<p>“It is a strange contradiction,” he said through his clenched teeth, “to see men help our soldiers to carry through the world the liberty they betray in their own homes by sowing discontent and alarm in the soul of its defenders. … Greeting and farewell, <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Blaise.”</p>
			<p>Before turning down the alley that runs alongside the Oratoire, Gamelin, his heart big with love and anger, wheeled round for a last look at the red carnations blossoming on a certain windowsill.</p>
			<p>He did not despair; the fatherland would yet be saved. Against Jean Blaise’s unpatriotic speeches he set his faith in the Revolution. Still he was bound to recognize that the tradesman had some show of reason when he asserted that the people of Paris had lost its old interest in public events. Alas! it was but too manifest that to the enthusiasm of the early days had little by little succeeded a widespread indifference, that never again would be seen the mighty crowds, unanimous in their ardour, of ’89, never again the millions, one in heart and soul, that in ’90 thronged round the altar of the <i xml:lang="fr">fédérés</i>. Well, good citizens must show double zeal and courage, must rouse the people from its apathy, bidding it choose between liberty and death.</p>
			<p>Such were Gamelin’s thoughts, and the memory of Élodie was a spur to his confidence.</p>
			<p>Coming to the Quais, he saw the sun setting in the distant west behind lowering clouds that were like mountains of glowing lava; the roofs of the city were bathed in a golden light; the windows flashed back a thousand dazzling reflections. And Gamelin pictured the Titans forging out of the molten fragments of bygone worlds Diké, the city of brass.</p>
			<p>Not having a morsel of bread for his mother or himself, he was dreaming of a place at the limitless board that should have all the world for guests and welcome regenerated humanity to the feast. Meantime, he tried to persuade himself that the fatherland, as a good mother should, would feed her faithful child. Shutting his mind against the gibes of the printseller, he forced himself to believe that his notion of a Revolutionary pack of cards was a novel one and a good one, and that with these happily conceived sketches of his he held a fortune in the portfolio under his arm. “Desmahis,” he told himself, “shall engrave them. We will publish for ourselves the new patriotic toy and we are sure to sell ten thousand packs in a month, at twenty sols apiece.”</p>
			<p>In his impatience to realize the project, he strode off at once for the Quai de la Ferraille, where Desmahis lived over a glazier’s shop.</p>
			<p>The entrance was through the shop. The glazier’s wife informed Gamelin that the <span xml:lang="fr">citoyen</span> Desmahis was not in, a fact that in no wise surprised the painter, who knew his friend was of a vagabond and dissipated humour and who marvelled that a man could engrave so much and so well as he did while showing so little perseverance. Gamelin made up his mind to wait a while for his return and the woman offered him a chair. She was in a black mood and began to grumble at the badness of trade, though she had always been told that the Revolution, by breaking windows, was making the glaziers’ fortunes.</p>
			<p>Night was falling; so abandoning his idea of waiting for his comrade, Gamelin took his leave of his hostess of the moment. As he was crossing the Pont-Neuf, he saw a detachment of National Guards debouch from the Quai des Morfondus. They were mounted and carried torches. They were driving back the crowd, and amid a mighty clatter of sabres escorting a cart driving slowly on its way to the guillotine with a man whose name no one knew, a ci-devant noble, the first prisoner condemned by the newly constituted Revolutionary Tribunal. He could be seen by glimpses between the guardsmen’s hats, sitting with hands tied behind his back, his head bared and swaying from side to side, his face to the cart’s tail. The headsman stood beside him lolling against the rail. The passersby had stopped to look and were telling each other it was likely one of the fellows who starved the people, and staring with eyes of indifference. Gamelin, coming closer, caught sight of Desmahis among the spectators; he was struggling to push a way through the press and cut across the line of march. He called out to him and clapped a hand on his shoulder⁠—and Desmahis turned his head. He was a young man with a handsome face and a stalwart person. In former days, at the Academy, they used to say he had the head of Bacchus on the torso of Hercules. His friends nicknamed him “Barbaroux” because of his likeness to that representative of the people.</p>
			<p>“Come here,” Gamelin said to him, “I have something of importance to say to you, Desmahis.”</p>
			<p>“Leave me alone,” the latter answered peevishly, muttering some half-heard explanation, looking out as he spoke for a chance of darting across:</p>
			<p>“I was following a divine creature, in a straw hat, a milliner’s wench, with her flaxen hair down her back; that cursed cart has blocked my way. … She has gone on ahead, she is at the other end of the bridge by now!”</p>
			<p>Gamelin endeavoured to hold him back by his coat skirts, swearing his business was urgent.</p>
			<p>But Desmahis had already slipped away between horses, guards, swords and torches, and was in hot pursuit of the milliner’s girl.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
