<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>The
<i>citoyenne</i> Gamelin was devoted to old
Brotteaux, and taking him
altogether, thought him the best and greatest man she had ever known.
She had not bidden him good-bye when he was arrested, because she would
not have dared to defy the powers that be and because in her lowly
estate she looked upon cowardice as a duty. But she had received a blow
she could not recover from.</p>
			<p>She could not eat and lamented she had lost her appetite just
when she
had at last the means to satisfy it. She still admired her son; but she
durst not let her mind dwell on the appalling duties he was engaged
upon
and congratulated herself she was only an ignorant woman who had no
call
to judge his conduct.</p>
			<p>The poor mother had found a rosary at the bottom of a trunk;
she hardly
knew how to use it, but often fumbled the beads in her trembling
fingers. She had lived to grow old without any overt exercise of her
religion, but she had always been a pious woman, and she would pray to
God all day long, in the chimney corner, to save her boy and that good,
kind Monsieur Brotteaux. Élodie often came to see her; they
durst not
look each other in the eyes, and sitting side by side they would talk
at
random of indifferent matters.</p>
			<p>One day in Pluviose, when the snow, falling in heavy flakes,
darkened
the sky and deadened the noises of the city, the <i>citoyenne</i>
Gamelin,
who was alone in the lodging heard a knock at the door. She started
violently; for months now the slightest noise had set her trembling.
She
opened the door. A young man of eighteen or twenty walked in, his hat
on
his head. He was dressed in a bottle-green box-coat, the triple collar
of which covered his bust and descended to the waist. He wore top-boots
of an English cut. His chestnut hair fell in ringlets about his
shoulders. He stepped into the middle of the studio, as if wishful that
all the light admitted by the snow-encumbered skylight might fall on
him, and stood there some moments without moving or speaking.</p>
			<p>At last, in answer to the <i>citoyenne</i>
Gamelin's look of amazement:</p>
			<p>"Don't you know your daughter?"</p>
			<p>The old dame clasped her hands:</p>
			<p>"Julie!... It is you.... Good God! is it possible?..."</p>
			<p>"Why, yes, it is I. Kiss me, mother."</p>
			<p>The <i>citoyenne</i> Gamelin pressed her daughter
to her bosom, and dropped a
tear on the collar of the box-coat. Then she began again in an anxious
voice:</p>
			<p>"You, in Paris!..."</p>
			<p>"Ah! mother, but why did I not come alone! For myself, they
will never
know me in this dress."</p>
			<p>It was a fact the box-coat sufficiently disguised her shape,
and she did
not look very different from a great many very young men, who, like
her,
wore their hair long and parted in two masses on the forehead. Her
features, which were delicately cut and charming, but burnt by the sun,
drawn with fatigue, worn with anxiety, had a bold, masculine
expression. She was slim, with long straight limbs and an easy
carriage; only the clear treble of her voice could have betrayed her
sex.</p>
			<p>Her mother asked her if she was hungry. She said she would be
glad of
something to eat, and when bread, wine and ham had been set before her,
she fell to, one elbow on the table, with a pretty gluttony, like Ceres
in the hut of the old woman Baubo.</p>
			<p>Then, the glass still at her lips:</p>
			<p>"Mother," she asked, "do you know when my brother will be
back? I have
come to speak to him."</p>
			<p>The good woman looked at her daughter in embarrassment and
said nothing.</p>
			<p>"I must see him. My husband was arrested this morning and
taken to the
Luxembourg."</p>
			<p>By this name of "husband" she designated Fortuné de
Chassagne, a
<i>ci-devant</i> noble and officer in Bouillé's
regiment. He had first loved
her when she was a work-girl at a milliner's in the Rue des Lombards,
and had carried her away with him to England, whither he had fled after
the 10th August. He was her lover; but she thought it more becoming to
speak of him as her husband before her mother. Indeed, she told herself
that the hardships they had shared had surely united them in a wedlock
consecrated by suffering.</p>
			<p>More than once they had spent the night side by side on a
bench in one
of the London parks and gathered up scraps of broken bread under the
table in the taverns in Piccadilly.</p>
			<p>Her mother could find no answer and gazed at her mournfully.</p>
			<p>"Don't you hear what I say, mother? Time presses, I must see
Évariste
at once; he, and he only, can save Fortuné's life."</p>
			<p>"Julie," answered her mother at last, "it is better you should
not speak
to your brother."</p>
			<p>"Why, what do you mean, mother?"</p>
			<p>"I mean what I say, it is better you do not speak to your
brother about
Monsieur de Chassagne."</p>
			<p>"But, mother, I must!"</p>
			<p>"My child, Évariste can never forgive Monsieur de
Chassagne for his
treatment of you. You know how angrily he used to speak of him, what
names he called him."</p>
			<p>"Yes, he called him seducer," said Julie with a little hissing
laugh,
shrugging her shoulders.</p>
			<p>"My child, it was a mortal blow to his pride.
Évariste has vowed never
again to mention Monsieur de Chassagne's name, and for two years now he
has not breathed one word of him or of you. But his feelings have not
altered; you know him, he can never forgive you."</p>
			<p>"But, mother, as Fortuné has married me ... in
London...."</p>
			<p>The poor mother threw up her eyes and hands:</p>
			<p>"Fortuné is an aristocrat, an <i>émigré</i>,
and that is cause enough to make
Évariste treat him as an enemy."</p>
			<p>"Mother, give me a direct answer. Do you mean that if I ask
him to go to
the Public Prosecutor and the Committee of General Security and take
the
necessary steps to save Fortuné's life, do you mean that he
will not
consent?... But, mother, he would be a monster if he refused!"</p>
			<p>"My child, your brother is an honest man and a good son. But
do not ask
him, oh! do not ask him to intercede for Monsieur de Chassagne....
Listen to me, Julie. He does not confide his thoughts to me and, no
doubt, I should not be competent to understand them ... but he is a
juror; he has principles; he acts as his conscience dictates. Do not
ask
him anything, Julie."</p>
			<p>"Ah! I see you know him now. You know that he is cold,
callous, that he
is a bad man, that ambition and vainglory are his only guides. And you
always loved him better than me. When we lived together, all three of
us, you set him up as my pattern to copy. His staid demeanour and grave
speech impressed you; you thought he possessed all the virtues. And me,
me you always blamed, you gave me all the vices, because I was frank
and
free, and because I climbed trees. You could never endure me. You loved
nobody but him. There, I hate him, your model Évariste; he
is a
hypocrite."</p>
			<p>"Hush, Julie! I have been a good mother to you as well as to
him. I had
you taught a trade. It has been no fault of mine that you are not an
honest woman and did not marry in your station. I loved you tenderly
and
I love you still. I forgive you and I love you. But do not speak ill of
Évariste. He is a good son. He has always taken care of me.
When you
left me, my child, when you abandoned your trade and forsook your shop,
to go and live with Monsieur de Chassagne, what would have become of me
without him? I should have died of hunger and wretchedness."</p>
			<p>"Do not talk so, mother; you know very well we would have
cherished you
with all affection, Fortuné and I, if you had not turned
your face from
us, at Évariste's instigation. Never tell me! he is
incapable of a
kindly action. It was to make me odious in your eyes that he made a
pretence of caring for you. He! love you?... Is he capable of loving
anyone? He has neither heart nor head. He has no talent, not a scrap.
To
paint, a man must have a softer, tenderer nature than his."</p>
			<p>She threw a glance round the canvases in the studio, which she
found to
be no better and no worse than when she left her home.</p>
			<p>"There you see his soul! he has put it in his pictures, cold
and sombre
as it is. His Orestes, his Orestes with the dull eye and cruel mouth,
and looking as if he had been impaled, is himself all over.... But,
mother, cannot you understand at all? I cannot leave Fortuné
in prison.
You know these Jacobins, these patriots, all Évariste's
crew. They will
kill him. Mother, little mother, darling mother, I cannot have them
kill
him. I love him! I love him! He has been so good to me, and we have
been
so unhappy together. Look, this box-coat is one of his coats. I had
never a shift left. A friend of Fortuné's lent me a jacket
and I got a
post with an eating-house keeper at Dover, while he worked at a
barber's. We knew quite well that to return to France was to risk our
lives; but we were asked if we would go to Paris to carry out an
important mission.... We agreed,—we would have accepted a
mission to
hell! Our travelling expenses were paid and we were given a letter of
exchange on a Paris banker. We found the offices closed; the banker is
in prison and going to be guillotined. We had not a brass farthing. All
the individuals with whom we were in correspondence and to whom we
could
appeal are fled or imprisoned. Not a door to knock at. We slept in a
stable in the Rue de la Femme-sans-tête. A charitable
bootblack, who
slept on the same straw with us there, lent my lover one of his boxes,
a
brush and a pot of blacking three quarters empty. For a fortnight
Fortuné made his living and mine by blacking shoes in the
Place de
Grève.</p>
			<p>"But on Monday a Member of the Commune put his foot on the box
to have
his boots polished. He had been a butcher once, a man
Fortuné had before
now given a kick behind to for selling meat of short weight. When
Fortuné raised his head to ask for his two sous, the rascal
recognized
him, called him aristocrat, and threatened to have him arrested. A
crowd
collected, made up of honest folks and a few blackguards, who began to
shout "<i>Death to the émigré!</i>"
and called for the gendarmes. At that
moment I came up with Fortuné's bowl of soup. I saw him
taken off to the
Section and shut up in the church of Saint-Jean. I tried to kiss him,
but they hustled me away. I spent the night like a dog on the church
steps.... They took him away this morning...."</p>
			<p>Julie could not finish, her sobs choked her.</p>
			<p>She threw her hat on the floor and fell on her knees at her
mother's
feet.</p>
			<p>"They took him away this morning to the Luxembourg prison.
Mother,
mother, help me to save him; have pity on your child!"</p>
			<p>Drowned in her tears, she threw open her box-coat and, the
better to
prove herself a woman and a wife, bared her bosom; seizing her mother's
hands, she held them close over her throbbing breasts.</p>
			<p>"My darling, my daughter, Julie, my Julie!" sobbed the widow
Gamelin,—and pressed her streaming cheeks to the girl's.</p>
			<p>For some moments they clung together without a word. The poor
mother
was racking her brains for some way of helping her daughter, and Julie
was watching the kind look in those tearful eyes.</p>
			<p>"Perhaps," thought Évariste's mother, "perhaps, if
I speak to him, he
will be melted. He is good, he is tender-hearted. If politics had not
hardened him, if he had not been influenced by the Jacobins, he would
never have had these cruel feelings, that terrify me because I cannot
understand them."</p>
			<p>She took Julie's head in her two hands:</p>
			<p>"Listen, my child. I will speak to Évariste. I will
sound him, get him
to see you and hear your story. The sight of you might anger him; his
first impulse might be to turn against you.... And then, I know him;
this costume would offend him; he is uncompromising in everything that
touches morals, that shocks the proprieties. <i>I</i> was
a bit startled to
see my Julie dressed as a man."</p>
			<p>"Oh! mother, the emigration and the fearful disorders of the
kingdom
have made these disguises quite a common thing. They are adopted in
order to follow a trade, to escape recognition, to get a borrowed
passport or a certificate approved. In London I saw young Girey dressed
as a girl,—and he made a very pretty girl; you must own,
mother, <i>that</i>
is a more scandalous disguise than mine."</p>
			<p>"My poor child, you have no need to justify yourself in my
eyes, whether
in this or any other thing. I am your mother; for me you will always be
blameless. I will speak to Évariste, I will say...."</p>
			<p>She broke off. She knew what her son was; she felt it in her
heart, but
she would not believe it, she <i>would</i> not know it.</p>
			<p>"He is kind-hearted. He will do it for my sake ... for your
sake, he
will do what I ask him."</p>
			<p>The two women, weary to the death, fell silent. Julie sank
asleep, her
head pillowed on the knees where she had rested as a child, while the
mother, the rosary between her hands, wept, like another <i>mater
dolorosa</i>, over the calamities she felt drawing stealthily
nearer and
nearer in the silence of this day of snow when everything was hushed,
footsteps and carriage wheels and the very heaven itself.</p>
			<p>Suddenly, with a keenness of hearing sharpened by anxiety, she
caught
the sound of her son's steps on the stairs.</p>
			<p>"Évariste!" she cried. "Hide"—and she
hurried the girl into the
bedroom.</p>
			<p>"How are you to-day, mother dear?"</p>
			<p>Évariste hung up his hat on its peg, changed his
blue coat for a working
jacket and sat down before his easel. For some days he had been working
at a sketch in charcoal of a Victory laying a wreath on the brow of a
dead soldier, who had died for the fatherland. Once the subject would
have called out all his enthusiasm, but the Tribunal consumed all his
days and absorbed his whole soul, while his hand had lost its knack
from
disuse and had grown heavy and inert.</p>
			<p>He hummed over the <i>Ça ira</i>.</p>
			<p>"I hear you singing," said the <i>citoyenne</i>
Gamelin; "you are
light-hearted, Évariste?"</p>
			<p>"We have reason to be glad, mother; there is good news. La
Vendée is
crushed, the Austrians beaten, the Army of the Rhine has forced the
lines of Lautern and of Wissembourg. The day is at hand when the
Republic triumphant will show her clemency. Why must the conspirators'
audacity increase the mightier the Republic waxes in strength, and
traitors plot to strike the fatherland a blow in the dark at the very
moment her lightnings overwhelm the enemies that assail her openly?"</p>
			<p>The <i>citoyenne</i> Gamelin, as she sat knitting
a stocking, was watching
her son's face over her spectacles.</p>
			<p>"Berzélius, your old model, has been to ask for the
ten livres you owed
him; I paid him. Little Joséphine has had a belly-ache from
eating too
much of the preserves the carpenter gave her. So I made her a drop of
herb tea.... Desmahis has been to see you; he was sorry he did not find
you in. He wanted to engrave a design by you. He thinks you have great
talent. He is a fine fellow; he looked at your sketches and admired
them."</p>
			<p>"When peace is re-established and conspiracy suppressed," said
the
painter, "I shall begin on my Orestes again. It is not my way to
flatter
myself; but that head is worthy of David's brush."</p>
			<p>He outlined with a majestic sweep the arm of his Victory.</p>
			<p>"She holds out palms," he said. "But it would be finer if her
arms
themselves were palms."</p>
			<p>"Évariste!"</p>
			<p>"Mother?"</p>
			<p>"I have had news ... guess, of whom...."</p>
			<p>"I do not know."</p>
			<p>"Of Julie ... of your sister.... She is not happy."</p>
			<p>"It would be a scandal if she were."</p>
			<p>"Do not speak so, my son, she is your sister. Julie is not a
bad woman;
she had a good disposition, which misfortune has developed. She loves
you. I can assure you, Évariste, that she only desires a
hard-working,
exemplary life and her fondest wish is to be reconciled to her friends.
There is nothing to prevent your seeing her again. She has married
Fortuné Chassagne."</p>
			<p>"She has written to you?"</p>
			<p>"No."</p>
			<p>"How, then, have you had news of her, mother?"</p>
			<p>"It was not by letter, Évariste; it was...."</p>
			<p>He sprang up and stopped her with a savage cry:</p>
			<p>"Not another word, mother! Do not tell me they have both
returned to
France.... As they are doomed to perish, at least let it not be at my
hands. For their own sake, for yours, for mine, let me not know they
are
in Paris.... Do not force the knowledge on me; otherwise...."</p>
			<p>"What do you mean, my son? you would think, you would dare...?"</p>
			<p>"Mother, hear what I say; if I knew my sister Julie to be in
that room
..." (and he pointed at the closed door), "I should go instantly to
denounce her to the Committee of Vigilance of the Section."</p>
			<p>The poor mother, her face as white as her coif, dropped her
knitting
from her trembling hands and sighed in a voice fainter than the
faintest
whisper:</p>
			<p>"I would not believe it, but I see it now; my boy is a
monster...."</p>
			<p>As pale as she, the froth gathering on his lips,
Évariste fled from the
house and ran to find at Élodie's side forgetfulness, sleep,
the
delicious foretaste of extinction.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
